
   
   
      
         
            &quot;Time To Clear out the Eurotrash&quot;

            The mass resignation early
Tuesday morning of all 20 members of the European Commission--universally
characterized as the most serious institutional crisis in the 42-year history
of the European community--dominated European papers Wednesday. The
Brussels-based commission is responsible for the day-to-day affairs of the
15-member European Union and enforces EU law. An investigation into charges of
fraud, corruption, and cronyism found evidence of incompetence, mismanagement,
and loss of political control. Although one commissioner, former French Prime
Minister Edith Cresson, was singled out for particularly strong criticism,
commission President Jacques Santer said the body chose "by unanimity to resign
collectively."

            
               Le Soir of Belgium supported the
dramatic gesture of unity since "it is too late for half-measures or for soft,
evasive answers" and claimed the resignations were needed because the
commission "suffers from a democracy deficit and therefore a lack of
legitimacy. ... To counterbalance this [it] has to be perfect, spotless." In
contrast, the Euro-skeptic Times of London speculated that the collective action might,
in fact, represent a further avoidance of individual responsibility, and
worried about the possible "renomination" of the entire commission (an idea
floated by Santer Tuesday): "This supposedly cathartic drama could end up as a
'Japanese' purge, in which heads roll only to ensure that things continue much
as before, with much the same discredited cast. That would be an outrage."

            France's Le Monde
                saw a silver lining in the crisis and
said the institution had to seize this opportunity to
"clean up its administrative and financial habits, improve its decision-making
process and, most of all, rediscover the inspiration and drive it has lost.
This might even mean increasing its funding and staffing levels." The
Guardian of
London pointed out that the commission's problems were partly caused by
the expansion of its responsibilities as it "found itself taking on ever more
grandiose tasks, largely on the demand of member states, with progressively
more limited resources. Yesterday's report shows they did not know how to
cope."

            Meanwhile, there is no
resolution in sight. Germany and Britain want to replace Santer as soon as
possible, while seven other countries would prefer him to remain as a
"caretaker" until Dec. 31, 1999--the end of his term. Britain's Independent made its
position clear in an editorial Wednesday: "It is time to clear out the Eurotrash."

            In Ecuador, Monday's reopening of the banks, after a week
of government-ordered closure, put the population in the streets, as depositors
queued to withdraw their funds and striking taxi drivers and bus operators
blocked roads to protest a 165 percent increase in the price of gasoline. As
Quito faced its third day of roadblocks Wednesday, Diario Hoy reported
that the capital was in a state of paralysis with schools closed and provisions
in short supply. El
Telégrafo of Guayaquil blamed the uncertainty gripping the populace on politicians'
failure to discuss possible solutions to the crisis. "There has to be an
opening and communication on the part of government. If it wants to achieve a
national accord, it's logical that it must display an openness to
reconciliation."

            In Beijing, the
state-run China
Daily pooh-poohed U.S. media reports about Chinese nuclear espionage at
the Los Alamos laboratories. In an editorial Wednesday, the paper claimed, "The 'lab-theft' story is
bound to follow in the footsteps of the 'political donations' and 'satellite
secret leakage' reports--to be forgotten within a few weeks after the claims
cannot be substantiated."

            
A story in Asahi
Shimbun of Japan revealed that Aum Shinrikyo, the cult that attacked
the Tokyo subway with Sarin nerve gas in 1995, is enjoying a resurgence based
in part on the financial security provided by a chain of successful computer
stores affiliated with the group. The paper claims that the stores' prosperity
stems from their cheap prices, which are possible because believers work for
next to nothing. A former member of the group told Asahi Shimbun that
"Aum followers work there, and the job is considered part of religious
training. Their salaries are therefore zero." A "public security investigator"
quoted by the paper speculated that Aum will "grow into a stronger and bigger
organization with ironclad solidarity" when Fumihiro Joyu, a senior cult
member, is released from prison in November.

             

         
      
   
