
   
   
      
         
             The Muteness of Prince George

            Gov. George W. Bush,
R-Texas, announced Sunday that he is forming a committee to explore whether he
should run for president. After a parade of adulatory speeches from committee
members, he fielded questions. One reporter asked whether abortion should be
illegal in the first trimester. "That's a hypothetical question," said Bush.
What about global economic instability? "I won't have specific remedies or
specific suggestions until I start moving around the country," Bush replied.
Should we build a missile defense system even if it violates the anti-ballistic
missile treaty? "I will be glad to answer all those questions once I get out in
the course of the campaign," Bush offered, ending the press conference.

            What a charade. Bush's
"campaign" has been underway for a year. He has plotted strategy, assembled a
campaign team, pitched to donors, courted politicians, and written letters to
potential allies in key states. His fund-raisers expect to collect $10 million
by the end of March. For the next three months, his "exploratory" committee
will raise money and build a campaign staff. Yet Bush remains clueless about
many national issues and, on others, he knows he can only lose votes by being
pinned down. Moreover, the longer he postpones his candidacy, the longer he
deprives his rivals of a target, thereby starving them to death. For these
reasons, Bush is claiming immunity to policy questions. And he's getting away
with it, thanks to several excuses.

            1. I'm doing my job. At his press
conference, Bush refused to answer questions about tax cuts and other "issues"
until Texas finishes its legislative session in May. He explained that being
governor is his "job" and that he had promised Texans he would stay home
through the session. "I'm a person who does in office what I say I will do," he
insisted. Former GOP Chairman Haley Barbour, a member of the exploratory
committee, seemed deeply moved. "I think Gov. Bush's keeping his commitment to
Texas shows what kind of leader George Bush is," said Barbour.

            Lest anyone contemplate
the convenience of this excuse, Bush spun it as a sacrifice. He regretted that
he wouldn't be "able" to visit key primary states for months. "Some have said,
'Well, you're gonna be too late in some state,' " he lamented. But "I've got a
job to do." The press swallowed this line whole. Bush "is understandably
reluctant to leave Austin at least until the Legislature concludes its work,"
said U.S. News & World Report . "He has defied conventional wisdom by
refusing to travel the country to raise money and court supporters."

            2. Read my principles. Bush outlined his
"core, conservative principles"--"limited government," "low taxes," "free and
fair trade," "local control of schools," "strong families," and "personal
responsibility." When asked about specific issues, he referred back to his
principles. "How exactly do you plan to preserve the prosperity of the United
States?" asked one reporter. "When I start to emerge out of the state after the
legislative session," said Bush, "I'm going to lay out an economic stimulus
package that will do just that. You heard the principles by which I'll be
making decisions." On foreign policy, he said only that his "framework" would
emphasize what's "good for America."

            
               3. Read my testimonials. To
deflect scrutiny from his own views, Bush stacked his committee with people who
can vouch for him. At the press conference, President Reagan's secretary of
state, George Shultz, and President Bush's national security aide, Condoleeza
Rice, vouched for Gov. Bush's toughness on foreign policy. Reps. J.C. Watts
Jr., R-Okla., and Henry Bonilla, R-Texas, vouched for his racial inclusiveness.
Pro-choice Rep. Jennifer Dunn, R-Wash., vouched for his belief in individual
freedom. When a reporter asked what Bush would do about Russia's meltdown, Bush
cited his "principles," babbled about missile defense, and said, "I of course
will be relying upon the briefings on details from people such as Dr. Rice."
With friends like these, who needs positions? "He has George Shultz
advising him on foreign policy," observed ABC's George Will with delight.

            Bush's personnel moves
serve him particularly well on social issues. He has conspicuously courted
former Christian Coalition executive director Ralph Reed, and in January he
made a pilgrimage to coalition founder Pat Robertson. Without publicly
embracing any of the coalition's positions, Bush elicited from Robertson the
magic words, "He loves the Lord." Conservative pundits are particularly excited
over Bush's recruitment of conservative Christian speech writer Mike Gerson.
Noting that Gerson "wrote Bob Dole's anti-Hollywood speech in 1996," Fred
Barnes inferred on Meet the Press that "one issue on which we're going
to hear a lot from [Bush] is cultural conservatism."

            4. Read my polls. Since Bush's advantages
lie in politics rather than policy, he steers attention to his campaign
juggernaut rather than to his platform. "The men and women on this stage
represent the best of the Republican Party," he boasted at his press
conference. Rep. Roy Blunt, R-Mo., handed Bush "a list of 80 current members of
Congress who have already endorsed your candidacy," and Bush's aides
distributed a similar list to reporters. On the weekend chat shows, pundits
marveled at Bush's deluge of endorsements, his bottomless coffers, and his
godlike standing in the polls. Bush never explicitly brings up money or polls,
because he doesn't have to. But he counts on them to keep the press pining for
him while he stiffs policy questions.

            
               5.

               Shame on you. When pressured to clarify his
positions, Bush morphs the question into attack politics and attack journalism.
"I will campaign on my beliefs and my principles, and I will not engage in the
petty politics of personal destruction," he insisted. A reporter asked him
about conservative opponents who associate him with his father's moderation.
"I'm going to try to work hard not to play the typical political game of
tearing down your opponent," Bush sniffed, "and I would hope others wouldn't
tear down my dad."

            Bush's wife and daughters provide another handy shield. "I
had doubts and concerns about what a campaign would mean for my family," he
confided to the assembled scribes. "I convinced my wife that I love her and
I'll always love her. That's the only thing that'll overcome the meat-grinding
aspects of national politics." From the podium, Dunn and Rice, two of the
committee's three front women, implored Bush's wife and daughters to endure the
campaign's "trial by fire." Bush has milked this protective anguish for months.
Never mind that according to Time , he privately told several financial
backers in January, "I love my wife. And I love my daughters. ... But they
don't have a veto on this."

            Bush's portrayal of substantive interrogation as
nasty nit-picking has completely suckered the media. Time reported that
his rivals were trying to "pose litmus-test questions" and "tear Bush down."
U.S. News accused them of "picking at his credentials" and warned, "Bush
will accept only so much battering." Quoting a Pat Buchanan adviser's demand
that Bush "take some positions" on "abortion, taxes, China, homosexual rights,"
U.S. News groaned that Buchanan "seems poised for another round of
bashing the front-runner." On Meet the Press , Lamar Alexander said of
Bush's vagueness: "We need to define what we mean. Are we for a single-rate
flat tax? Or are we, as I am, for tripling the tax deduction for each child to
$8,000? Are we for affirmative action based on need, as I am, or based on race?
Are we for English for the children on the first day of school, or are we for
federal bilingual education programs? I'm arguing for plain talk, not weasel
words." To which host Tim Russert replied, "Why won't you abide by the
11 th Amendment and stop criticizing George W. Bush?"

            Meanwhile, Bush suffers
in silence as his fund-raisers bleed the field dry. "I'll play the hand I was
dealt," he shrugs stoically. Poor George. He can't help it. He was born with a
silver gag in his mouth.

         
      
   
