
   
   
      
         
            No. 210: &quot;Let Us Now Praise Famous Me&quot;

            

               "You like me! You really like me!"-- Sally Field
               
            

            

               "I'm the king of the world and the lord of Monkey Island!"-- James
Cameron
               
            

            
               Every Academy
Awards broadcast yields one perfect remark. Participants are invited to predict
the comment from Sunday's Oscars that will be most quoted in Monday's
papers.
            

            

               ( Topic courtesy of Greg Diamond. )
            

             

            by 5
p.m. ET Sunday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               
                  Wednesday's
Question (No. 209)--"Noise Is Off":
               

               

                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    The whistle, the
clanging, it's a good noise," said Dennis Brady, "a noise that's supposed to be
there."
Where?
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               

               "The
NBA, trying to spin the hacking fouls and awful shooting that have dominated
play."-- Matt Sullivan
               

               
"Emanating from Bob Dole's new, souped-up prostate."-- David Rakoff
               

               "The
Mir space station, according to Boris Yeltsin."-- Michael Wilde
               

               "HAL's
shiva house."-- Beth Sherman
               

               "Gosh,
I hope nobody made any Amtrak jokes. Remember, comedy is tragedy PLUS time.
Such jokes wouldn't be appropriate until, oh, let's say, next Monday around
noon."-- Nell Scovell
               

                

                

                

                

               Click
for more answers.

               
                  Randy's
Wrap-Up
               

            

            Remember the grotesque
defense-spending boondoggles of the '50s and '60s meant to bridge the "missile
gap" with the Soviets and the "swimming pool and redwood deck gap" at the
summer houses of General Dynamics executives? Well, it's back, and it's called
the anti-missile system, an unworkable solution to an imaginary problem. It's
the perfect program for a time when the best delivery system for a small
nuclear warhead is UPS. Not only will the ABM program absorb money from
programs that might actually benefit the country, but by taking scientists and
engineers away from real work, it will skew technological progress for decades.
(Wait, wait, I'm about to tie this into the actual topic.) The one tiny moment
of happiness to come from this occurred yesterday; at the exact moment of
President Clinton's utter moral collapse, I distinctly heard a whistle and
clang. Thank you. And now let's bring out Bobby Orsini and his amazing
orangutans!

            
               Romance of the
Rails Answer
            

            The sound belongs at a railroad crossing in
Kankakee, near the fatal Amtrak crash in Bourbonnais, Ill., said a local
resident.

            Since 1991, the
Transportation Department has reduced the number of these crossings from
290,000 to 257,000 and intends to close another 30,000. Last year there were
422 deaths at crossings, down one-third from five years earlier. The remaining
crossings will get upgraded warning systems including, in some cases, gates
that block all four lanes of the road. The truck involved in the Bourbonnais
crash is suspected of veering around the gates in an attempt to beat the train
through the crossing.

            
               Daniel Radosh's
Spring Cleaning Extra
            

            If amusing but ultimately unusable newspaper
clippings are the dust bunnies of a free-lance humorist's living room, then the
News Quiz Spring Cleaning Extra is the rug under which to sweep them.

            

               "There's a certain value in being overly courteous, even when it's to the
point of being somewhat sarcastic."-- Rudy Giuliani, admitting that police
officers should call men "sir," as long as it's clear they don't mean any
actual respect by it.
               

               "Only one thing would be worse than the status quo. And that would be for
the status quo to become the norm."-- Elizabeth Dole, craftily stealing
rhetoric from rival candidate Dan Quayle.
               

               "Young children who are enchanted with the Teletubbies and Barney
characters want to participate in a nurturing experience. Unfortunately, the
children are toppling the TVs down on themselves causing head traumas and other
crushing injuries."-- Dr. Ellen Crain of the Jacobi Medical Center, warning
parents not to let their little ones hug the television. Especially the
Teletubbies. Especially the one with the purse.
               

               "PBS shows are not killers."-- PBS spokeswoman Donna Williams, responding
to Dr. Crain, and generating the most ambivalent network slogan since NBC's "If
you haven't seen it, it's new to you."
               

               "Loads of pot!"-- From an ad for a two-family house in the New York
Times "Real Estate" section. I'm holding out for "tons of crack" down the
street.
               

               "A picture caption in 'Weekend' last Friday ... misidentified a man in a
Lone Ranger mask standing with J. Edgar Hoover. ... The FBI said yesterday that
while the man was not Clayton Moore, one of several actors who have portrayed
the Lone Ranger, it had not yet determined his identity."-- A New York
Times correction, barely concealing the urge to shout, "Who was that masked
man?"
               

               "But last year in October, I finally did come out. I joined a teen support
group for gay, lesbian, transgendered, questioning, bisexual and non-labeling
youth."-- A contributor to New Youth Connections , a high-school
newspaper. Is it just me, or do the non-labeling youth lack the courage of
their convictions?
               

            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Intercranial noises.

         
      
   
