
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Kosovo
update: 1) House Republicans, having voted down (on a tie vote) a
resolution expressing support for the NATO bombing campaign, then voted to add
several billion dollars in defense spending to the money President Clinton
requested for the bombing. Democrats accused Republicans of hypocrisy and
disloyalty. Republicans accused Democrats of squandering military resources on
a foolish war. 2) The Rev. Jesse Jackson brought a delegation of religious
leaders to Belgrade, seeking to persuade Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic
to release three captured U.S. peacekeeping soldiers. 3) NATO bombed
Yugoslavia's army headquarters and interior ministry. 4) A NATO missile strayed
into Bulgaria but killed nobody because it didn't explode. NATO apologized. 5)
The top U.N. human rights officer criticized NATO for killing civilians and
making itself "the sole judge of what is or is not acceptable to bomb."
(4/30/99)
            

            
The Colorado
high-school massacre is spawning copycats . A Canadian student shot
another student to death in a manner similar to the Colorado tragedy. Four kids
in Texas and five in Brooklyn were charged with conspiring to blow up their
schools. A kid in upstate New York was found with a bomb-making arsenal with
which he evidently planned to destroy his school. A pipe bomb was found in an
Oklahoma school. In various places around the country, schools suspended
classes, and kids were questioned or even arrested due to bomb threats and
rumors of grudge-bearing students with hit lists. Some schools have reportedly
banned dark trench coats. The spins: 1) School violence has become a national
crisis. 2) School violence is declining and has been absurdly overhyped. 3) The
overhyping is good because it is cathartic and encourages vigilance. 4) The
overhyping is encouraging the copycats. 5) Psychopathic kids are in the grip of
violent fantasies. 5) Hysterical parents are in the grip of violent fantasies.
(4/30/99)
            

            
The Palestinian
Central Council agreed not to declare a Palestinian state May 4. The
Middle East peace process was supposed to conclude that day, but rocky
negotiations and new elections in Israel (scheduled for May 17) have delayed
the process. The U.S. editorial spin: The Palestinians held off because the
United States and the European Union asked them to do so and promised to
support eventual statehood. The Palestinian spin: We held off to avoid scaring
Israeli voters, which might have helped re-elect right-wing Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, whom we despise for sabotaging the peace process.
Netanyahu's spin: They held off because I'm strong and vigilant, so re-elect
me. (4/30/99)
            

            
New evidence
supports the theory that Mars once resembled Earth . A magnetic pattern
on Mars indicates that it had dynamic, internal heat similar to Earth's,
increasing the likelihood that Mars had a warm atmosphere, water, and
elementary life. The trumpeted spin: Mars had life! The buried spin: Earth
faces death. (4/30/99)
            

            
The
environmental panic over deformed frogs was deflated. For years,
scientists have been finding frogs around the United States with deformed,
missing, or extra limbs. The old theory: The frogs are a harbinger of a
"poisoned environment," possibly caused by industrial chemicals or erosion of
the ozone layer. The new theory, based on subsequent studies: The frogs'
development was screwed up by parasites that infected them. The new version of
the old theory: The parasites are a harbinger of a poisoned environment.
(4/30/99)
            

            

               Update 
               on the Colorado high school massacre : 1)
The local sheriff said three kids in combat fatigues who knew the killers and
waited outside the school during the shooting are "subjects of our
investigation." 2) Investigators determined that a girlfriend of one of the
killers bought two of the guns they used. It is not yet clear whether she knew
what they planned to do with the arms. 3) A security camera reportedly captured
the shootings that took place in the school cafeteria. 4) The Marine Corps says
that just before the massacre it rejected an application from one of the
killers on "medical" grounds--evidently he had been seeing a shrink and taking
psychiatric medication. 5) Marilyn Manson canceled the rest of his U.S. tour,
explaining that there's "not a great atmosphere" for his music after the
shootings. According to the Associated Press, "Manson said he blames ignorance,
hatred, and access to guns for the tragedy." (4/28/99)
            

            
President
Clinton proposed new federal gun control legislation . It would raise the
legal age for handgun possession to 21, prohibit juvenile possession of
semiautomatic weapons, require trigger locks, make parents criminally liable
for "knowingly or recklessly" giving their kids access to guns used to kill or
injure, and extend background checks to gun show patrons and people who try to
buy explosives. Meanwhile, Republican congressional leaders proposed a national
forum on "youth and culture." The spins: 1) Clinton is cynically exploiting
public unease about guns in the wake of the Colorado tragedy. 2) Clinton is
courageously exploiting public unease about guns in the wake of the Colorado
tragedy. 3) Clinton's focus on guns is simple-minded and would not have stopped
the Colorado tragedy. 4) The GOP's focus on "culture" is simple-minded and
would not have stopped the Colorado tragedy. (For further analysis of Clinton's
new spin on gun control, see "" in 
                  Slate
               .) (4/28/99)
            

            
Florida
lawmakers have agreed to give kids in bad public school districts
state-funded vouchers to attend private schools . It is the country's
first state voucher program. Some cities already have vouchers, and some states
are considering similar proposals. Florida will rate districts by standardized
test scores and will let kids in the lowest-scoring districts switch to any
school that will accept them. The state will transfer $4,000 from the school
each kid leaves to the school where he or she enrolls. The arguments pro: 1) It
gives kids and parents a choice. 2) It breaks the stranglehold of bureaucrats
and teachers' unions. 3) It puts bad schools on notice that they must shape up
or lose their students. The arguments con: 1) The good parents will yank their
kids out of bad schools, making these schools worse and leaving kids with
indifferent or helpless parents trapped in them. 2) Using state money for
religious schools is unconstitutional. 3) The vouchers are too small to give
poor kids a real shot at a good private school. (4/28/99)
            

            
Denver Broncos
quarterback John Elway is retiring . He won the last two Super Bowls and
holds the National Football League records for games won (148) and game-winning
or game-tying drives in the fourth quarter (47). He is one of only two
quarterbacks to throw for 50,000 yards and is one of only three to throw 300
touchdown passes. Elway said he is retiring because his knee is damaged, he has
accomplished what he sought in football, and he wants to spend more time with
his family. The sunny spin: He's going out on top, just as Michael Jordan did.
The sad spin: He won't get a chance to try for a third Super Bowl. The cynical
spin: He's shrewdly getting out before the Broncos collapse.
(4/26/99)
            

         
      
   
