
   
   
      
         
            The Politics of Port

            "There are some things so
intangible that only culture explains them," a friend said to me many years
ago. It had been a long, wine-filled dinner, and the talk had turned to serious
matters. My friend, an Englishman, was warming to his subject: that the British
love affair with claret--red Bordeaux--was one of the great, and for him
joyous, mysteries of life. Another, he continued, was the Englishman's
proclivity for port. As you can tell, his interests were limited, but he was
making a (vinous) version of an argument that has been given great credence in
intellectual circles of late.

            Culture is hot. By
culture I don't mean Wagner and Abstract Expressionism--they've always been
hot--but rather culture as an explanation for social phenomena. People now use
the concept of national or ethnic culture routinely to answer seemingly complex
questions. Why is the United States economy bursting with growth? It's obvious:
our unique entrepreneurial culture. Why is Russia unable to adapt to
capitalism? Alas, it has a feudal, anti-market culture. Never mind that
American culture was around to witness stagflation, not to mention the Great
Depression. And Japan's and Germany's feudalism seem to have adapted nicely to
capitalism.

            Cultural explanations persist because intellectuals like
them. They make valuable the detailed knowledge of countries' histories, which
intellectuals have in great supply. And they add an air of mystery and
complexity to the study of societies. But beneath them usually lurks something
more simple and straightforward--such as politics.

            Consider claret. The
British drink Bordeaux because for hundreds of years the wines of that region
were given preferential tariff treatment for powerful political reasons. In the
11 th century, when our story begins, the English actually liked and
imported vast quantities of somewhat acidic wines from La Rochelle (now the
Charentes region north of Bordeaux), a sunny and frost-free area, whose wine
exports were aggressively promoted by its ruler, the Duke of Aquitaine. (The
duke's lands included Bordeaux.) The duke died, and in 1152 his daughter,
Eleanor of Aquitaine, married Henry Plantagenet, Duke of Normandy. Two years
later, he became Henry II and Eleanor became queen of England. (Their fiery
relationship was memorably replayed by Peter O'Toole and Katharine Hepburn in
The Lion in Winter .)

            Initially, little changed, since Eleanor, like her father,
still favored La Rochelle. But the Bordelais coveted the English market and
worked tirelessly for special favors. Over time, as it always does, the
lobbying worked. Henry's grandson John set up a classic political trade that
would make any K Street consultant proud. In return for support against the
King of France (who knows why, they were always at war in those days), John
would exempt Bordeaux from the principal tax on its exports. The merchants of
La Rochelle miscalculated and did not counteroffer, infuriating King John, who
decided to favor Bordeaux further. The king ordered that all his household
wines would come from Bordeaux--a huge order, since it included the army's
supplies. "What finally decided it against La Rochelle was not the acidity of
its wines, but the disloyalty of its citizens," writes wine historian Hugh
Johnson. Thus was born the special, mystical relationship between England and
Bordeaux.

            As for port, in the
17 th century the naval rivalry between England and Holland, on the
one hand, and Spain and France, on the other, was still intense. In this
diplomatic game, keeping Portugal happy was crucial so that its seaports,
particularly Lisbon, would not become enemy bases. In 1703, England struck a
deal, the Methuen Treaty, which got Portugal to ally itself with England and
Holland against the Catholic powers. Naturally, Portugal got something out of
it--a lowering of import tariffs on its products and some royal patronage. When
war between France and England did break out, the English consumer market
needed substitutes for Bordeaux. Portuguese wines proved cheap and--within a
few years--readily available. Amusingly, the wines that created the English
interest in port were not actually the sweet wines of today but rather normal
table wines. Far from having a natural affinity for port, the English simply
drank it because the Portuguese had already made inroads into the consumer
market.

            The moral of this story is not that taste, let alone
culture, doesn't matter. After all, once the English got hooked on Bordeaux
they stayed with it even after most preferential treatment abated (around
1453). And the Englishman's love of red Bordeaux wines has had massive, global
effects. For one thing, it created the modern Bordeaux wine industry. Whole
swaths of Bordeaux, including much of what is now considered the best wine
country, were cultivated in response to English demand. Also, since the British
were the global superpower and style setters of the 19 th century
world, everybody copied their tastes. That's why today, from Australia to South
Africa to California to Chile, the most expensive wines in the world are made
from the same grape (cabernet sauvignon) and in the same style as red Bordeaux,
down to the shape of the bottle.

            But culture itself can be shaped and changed. Behind
so many cultural attitudes, tastes, and preferences lie the political and
economic forces that shaped them, even in something as intangible as wine and
food. All of which makes me glad that the two great powers that lost out in
this century's power struggles were Germany and Russia, or we might be savoring
the delights of borscht, potatoes, and sauerkraut, washed down by gallons of
vodka!

         
      
   
