
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Loeb
Blow
            

            I am pained by the of me in

                  Slate
                for writing an essay on personal finance that ran
in a special advertising section in the March 22 issue of Time . Much or
all of the criticism is based on a false assumption: that I was paid by
Time for this assignment.

            In fact, I did not receive payment from
anybody--not one penny. Time did offer to pay me a fee, size
unspecified. I declined. But I suggested that Time might want to make a
contribution to one of the charities of which I am an officer and director,
Recording for the Blind & Dyslexic. Time , of course, was pleased to
do so. I do not know the size of this contribution. My name will in no way be
attached to it. I certainly will not receive a tax deduction for it. I will
receive no credit for it in any way. To reiterate as emphatically as I can: I
was not paid by Time , not paid by Time Inc., not paid by the
advertisers, not paid by anybody in any way. This a key point that I should
have clarified and corrected earlier.

            So why did I accept the writing assignment? I did
it because Time offers a magnificent platform, because I frankly don't
mind the limelight, and because I believe that the counsel and cautions I have
to offer about personal finance may be useful to other people.

            This is also a good time
for me to reiterate that the Columbia Journalism Review was, is, and
always will be independent, tough-minded, fair, and impartial in all its
judgments.

            -- Marshall Loeb
            

            
Editor, Columbia Journalism Review
New York City

            

               
                  Judith Shulevitz replies: When I interviewed Marshall
Loeb, he said, according to my notes, "I am paid by Time Inc." He did not tell
me that the payment had been made to charity and not to him personally. He now
says he does not remember whether the decision to give it to charity was made
before or after my item appeared. He also says that payment for the first two
advertorials went to his book publisher and that he also did not profit
directly or indirectly. This is something else he did not mention in our
interview. It seems clear that Loeb has not personally profited from writing
advertorials. I think my misunderstanding on this point is understandable, but
I apologize for suggesting otherwise. I still think it is wrong from someone in
Loeb's position to be writing advertorials, even for free.
            

            
               Game Over (and
Over)
            

            Your discussion of the winner's curse as it relates
to online auctions (see "") overlooked one very important point: the multiplier
effect that comes from the power of the Internet to reduce transaction
costs.

            Let's take video games as an example. Over the last
five years I have bought one or two new video games a year, ones that seemed so
great that they were worth the $50. The main reason I only bought one or two
was I knew that after playing them I would generally be stuck with them. Sure,
I might be able to sell them to a used software store, but I wouldn't be able
to get more than $5 or so because those stores must mark them up so
substantially to cover their own costs. Now, thanks to Internet auctions (eBay
being my personal favorite) I can do most of my game shopping online. When I
was interested in picking up the new smash hit Unreal , I went to eBay
and saw that over the past month some 70 or so copies of that game had been
auctioned for about $22 each. Over the following week or so I tracked the 20 to
30 auctions for Unreal that were going on, and I eventually won a copy
for $18.50 plus $4 shipping. The game arrived, I played it for a few weeks, and
then I put it back up for auction right there on eBay and made back almost all
of my money.

            Now that consumers know that there is a fluid
aftermarket for video games, they are more likely to go into a store and buy
one of these games for full price on the day it comes out. They know that they
can play it and auction it off right away online when its value is still quite
high. The net result is not only far more transactions at much lower costs but
also a sharp increase in market participation, thanks to the price
discrimination seen over time. (If you're not willing to pay $22 wait a few
months until the online market is only going for $16.)

            In addition, any effects of the winner's curse are
offset by the fact that "losing" bidders become "winning" sellers when they
re-auction products. The winner's curse can therefore be said not to exist for
products that we buy, enjoy, and resell without using up their inherent
value.

            The winner's curse may be
pervasive in auctions for Beanie Babies and Faye Dunaway's eye mask, but that
is in large part because those items have such little inherent value, and they
can lose their public appeal overnight. Even there, though, the magic of the
Internet auction helps out one last time: He who has overpaid for Faye
Dunaway's eye mask can enjoy it for a bit and then put it right back up for
auction.

            
               --Bart Scott
Epstein
            

            
Charlottesville, Va.

            
               A Kosovar by Any
Other Name
            

            Just a point of
clarification--these refugees from Kosovo are Kosovars, not "ethnic Albanians"
as much of the media keep singing. If they are not Kosovars, then Jesse Jackson
is an "ethnic African," Dan Rather is an "ethnic German," and Simon Wiesenthal
is an "ethnic Jew," and so on. Please label things correctly. Calling the
Kosovars "ethnic Albanians" makes it sound as if they are really Albanians,
though they have lived in Kosovo for over 500 years.

            -- Professor Samuel
Hamod, Ph.D.
            

            San
Diego, Calif.

            
               Clearing
Up
            

            "" asked, "Why did the weather prevent NATO from
hitting the Serbian forces purging the refugees, when it didn't seem to hamper
the bombing of Belgrade? ... The papers have shed little light on how poor
weather can impede various missions."

            Here's the answer:
Bombing buildings in Belgrade, or other fixed sites with known coordinates, can
be accomplished by GPS (Global Positioning System, a satellite navigation
service)-guided weapons, such as Tomahawk missiles. It is not necessary to be
able to see the target. Bombing mobile targets, such as troops performing
ethnic cleansing, requires the use of laser-guided weapons. Because we don't
know in advance where these targets will be, we can't use GPS-guided weapons,
and laser-guided weapons require clear weather to operate.

            -- Lt. Cmdr. Sean
Peters , U.S. Navy

            Chesapeake, Va.

         
      
   
