
   
   
      
         
            No. 219: &quot;Not&quot;

            

               The slogan in Maine, promulgated at government expense, is "Not Me, Not
Now." Not what?
            

            by noon
ET Tuesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's Question
(No. 218)--"You Smell Something?":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           "It stinks in God's nostrils, and I
know it stinks in the law's nostrils, and it stinks to me." Who said this about
what?
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            "Noted
attorney and amateur theologian Alan Dershowitz, protesting a parking ticket
with his usual élan."-- Tim Carvell
            

            "New
York City Consumer Affairs Commissioner Jules Polonetsky, ever vigilant about
Passover gouging, has discovered some fake gefilte fish produced by the Posse
Comitatus."-- Norm Oder
            

            "Fidel
Castro, on the suspiciously effective performance of the Baltimore Orioles'
bullpen."-- Al Petrosky
            

            
"Candor, gossiping about Stench at the recent Abstract Concepts Potluck and
Bingo Night."-- Bill Wasik
            

            "A
dog's highest praise."-- Dale Shuger
            

             

             

             

             

             

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Judging by News Quiz
participants--and I do--the two groups likeliest to express nasal disdain are
film critics and political opponents. This is a disturbing ceding of the field
to professionals. It is, for instance, the right of every American to carp
about his boss (I believe that's in the Constitution) and his relatives (the
Bible). But there is a recent reluctance to fire at certain targets unless one
has impressive credentials, a professionalizing of contumely. This is
lamentable and unnecessary. Remember (using Ginkoba if need be) what Johnson
said about literary criticism: "You may scold a carpenter who has made you a
bad table, though you cannot make a table. It is not your trade to make
tables." Although as any trained Johnson scholar can tell you, the Great Cham
clearly did not mean you should criticize News Quiz because you're discontent
with the replies selected for Page 1.

            
               Really, Really
Sorry Answer
            

            The Rev. Henry Lyons was describing his theft of the
$250,000 that the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith had donated to rebuild
black churches destroyed by fire.

            The weeping minister
spoke in Largo, Fla., as he was sentenced to five and a half years in prison
for swindling more than $4 million from the National Baptist Convention USA,
the country's largest black denomination, while serving as its president. "I
cannot shake the feeling that I have let so many people down," he added. Well,
yeah.

            
               Alma Mater
Extra
            

            In the fierce struggle
for first-class students who can write first-class tuition checks, many
universities have begun advertising. Can you name the schools that used the
following slogans in recent magazine ads?

            

               Slogans
            

            1. Sacrifice Nothing

            2. Sacrifice Nothing for Nobody Nohow

            3. Service, Pride and Excellence

            4. Write ... Explore ... Discover

            5. Dream, Think, Become

            6. Drink, Vomit, Repeat

            7. A True Education Creates a Lifelong Thirst for
More

            8. A True Education Creates a Lifelong Thirst for
More Money

            9. Sorry About the Vietnam War

            10. Now 50 Percent
Whiter

            

               Answers
            

            1. Bennington

            2. Yale*

            3. State University of New York

            4. Sarah Lawrence

            5. College of New Rochelle

            6. Dartmouth*

            7. Iona College

            8. Harvard (Business School)*

            9. Harvard (political science department)*

            10. University of
California*

            *May be
the liquor talking.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            A delightful potpourri with a faint but disturbing
note of disdain for the delightful Shakespeare in Love .

         
      
   
