
   
   
      
         
            A Peace Deal by Next Week?

            

               Kosovo update: 1) NATO hit the wrong targets again in
Belgrade. A bomb struck a hospital, the Libyan Embassy, and the homes
of several European ambassadors, killing four people. NATO's explanation: The
bomb was "misdirected for technical reasons." The Yugoslav explanation: The
sick and the newborn are "NATO's ideal targets." 2) Slobodan Milosevic has
reportedly accepted a peace plan drafted by Russia and seven Western nations,
with two sticking points: He objects to a peacekeeping force composed of NATO
troops and to the withdrawal of Serb troops from Kosovo before NATO stops
bombing. Russian diplomats say they're "not that optimistic" about a deal, but
a Milosevic aide predicted "a political settlement in the next week." 3) NATO
consensus on the use of force splintered. Britain called for an invasion of
Kosovo. Germany threatened to veto ground troops. Italy recommended a bombing
halt for several days after a U.N. resolution is announced. 4) The New York
Times reported that NATO Commander Gen. Wesley Clark supports stationing
troops on Kosovo's borders. Clark's spin: Prepping for ground war will force
Milosevic to consider a deal. The counterspin: Prepping for ground war will
force Milosevic to call NATO's bluff.

            

               A 15-year-old student shot six classmates at a suburban Atlanta high
school. No one died, evidently because he aimed below the waist. He
had a pistol and a rifle but only used the latter. Afterward, he tried to shoot
himself but couldn't do it, saying, "Oh, my God, I'm so scared." Theory 1: He
was distraught because his girlfriend had broken up with him. Theory 2: It was
the last day of school, and a classmate said, "he's been wanting to do this all
year long." President Clinton cited the shooting as another reason to tighten
gun laws. The Associated Press called it "yet another school attack in a
comfortable suburban community." The reassuring spin: School shootings are
unlikely to happen in your community. The cynical spin: That's what officials
in this Atlanta suburb told parents after last month's Colorado school
massacre.

            

               The Senate passed another gun control measure. The Democratic
amendment would require background checks for all purchases at gun shows and
for anyone who tries to buy back his gun from a pawn shop. It would also extend
some background checks from one to three days. Analysts called it another
retreat for the GOP--in part due to the Atlanta school shooting earlier in the
day--and a big campaign issue for Vice President Gore, who cast the deciding
vote after a 50-50 tie. The liberal spins: 1) We're dismayed by these school
shootings. 2) We're delighted that these school shootings are discrediting the
National Rifle Association. 3) Republicans are fleeing the NRA like scalded
dogs. 4) Republicans are defending the NRA like mad dogs. The conservative
spins: 1) Gun laws are unenforceable. 2) The Clinton-Gore administration
doesn't do enough to enforce gun laws.

            

               Russian legislators approved President Boris Yeltsin's choice for prime
minister. He is Sergei Stepashin, the head of Russia's police and
security forces. This comes a few days after Yeltsin fired then-Prime Minister
Yevgeny Primakov and survived an impeachment vote in parliament. The spins: 1)
Yeltsin has broken legislators' will to oppose him. 2) Legislators blew off
their steam in the impeachment vote and had little interest in fighting over
Stepashin. 3) They worried that if they rejected Stepashin, Yeltsin would
nominate someone worse. 4) They worried that if they rejected Stepashin,
Yeltsin might call a new election, threatening their jobs. 5) They figure they
don't need to reject Stepashin since Yeltsin will fire him soon enough.

            

               The Supreme Court struck down two-tiered welfare benefits.
This affects 15 states that restrict newcomers to the benefits they had
received in their previous states, ostensibly to discourage people from
benefit-shopping. Justice Antonin Scalia joined the 7-2 decision. The spins: 1)
It's a victory for the right to welfare. 2) It's a victory for equal rights. 3)
It's a victory for liberals who want to block states from restricting civil
liberties. 4) It's a victory for conservatives who want to block states from
regulating business and restricting property rights. 5) Rather than pay more to
new residents, states will equalize benefits by paying less to old
residents.

            

               Israeli voters ousted Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. He
was soundly defeated by Labor Party leader Ehud Barak after other candidates
quit so that their supporters could unite behind Barak against Netanyahu. The
spins: 1) Now the peace process can move forward again. 2) The election wasn't
between a hawk and a dove; it was between a dovish hawk (Netanyahu) and a
hawkish dove (Barak). 3) The election wasn't about the peace process; it was
about Israel's tribal domestic politics. 4) The election wasn't about issues;
it was about voters' belief that Netanyahu is slimy and untrustworthy. Check
the latest election results here .

            

               Charismatic is one race away from winning the Triple Crown.
Having won the Kentucky Derby at 31-1 odds (the longest long-shot winner since
1940), he surprised the bookmakers again by winning the Preakness at 8-1. A
victory in the June 5 Belmont Stakes would make him the first Triple Crown
winner in 20 years. He was such a disappointment earlier this year that his
owners tried to sell him for $62,500, but nobody bought him. His jockey in both
races, Chris Antley, is coming back from a bout with drug abuse in the late
'80s and a weight problem last year. The spins: 1) It's "a fairy tale ride" for
"the ex-claimer and the comeback kid." ("From Nag to Riches," says the
Washington Post .) 2) It's not such a fairy tale for the horse's trainer
or owners, who have already won numerous Triple Crown races. 3) The horse loves
being disrespected, and he strutted before and after the race to show up the
bookies.

            

               The Thomas Jefferson-Sally Hemings controversy flared up
again. Jefferson's descendants 1) invited some of Hemings' descendants
to attend an exclusive family gathering (the "Monticello Association"); 2)
voted down a motion to eject the Hemings clan from the gathering; 3) voted down
a proposal to make the Hemingses honorary members immediately; and 4) appointed
a committee to decide whether the Hemingses are real descendants or impostors
(despite demonstrated genetic links). The spin from the inclusive Jeffersons:
The rest of the family are racist snobs who won't acknowledge Jefferson had an
affair with a slave. The spin from the exclusive Jeffersons: "We're not
racists. We're snobs."

         
      
   
