
   
   
      
         
            No. 217: &quot;Unlisted&quot;

            

               Up until Tuesday, Texan Robert White was No. 4 on a list of 3,600.
What's the list and how did he get off it?
            

            by noon
ET Thursday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question
(No. 216)--"Yin and Yang?":
            

            

               
                  
                     In Belgrade, one group includes the American Center,
the British Council, the Goethe Institute, and the French Cultural Center; the
other group includes the Original Levi's Store and You've Got Mail .
What's the distinction?
                  
               
            

            "Oh,
like we need to know something about a place before we bomb it."-- Daniel
Radosh
            

            "The
first group got the lamb's blood 'X' on the door."-- Beth Sherman
            

            "Things
that were burnt down and things that should have been burnt down."-- Kenton
A. Hoover ( Katherine Hobson and Chris Thomas had similar
answers.)

            "The
latter contain no copies of The Sorrows of Young Werther ."-- Greg
Diamond
            

            "Aw,
jeez, have Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan sided with the Serbs already?"-- Tim
Carvell
            

             

             

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            News Quiz goes to war. And damned uneasily. If we
neglect the war, the quiz is marginalized into News of the Weird ; if
we refer to it, we risk trivializing genuine suffering. Catch 22 was
funny about war by blasting the Army's bureaucratic madness. M*A*S*H --at
least the TV version--offered a pseudo-anti-war stance while enjoying frat boy
high jinks: I believe their contract with CBS required that in every third
episode the entire camp would see Loretta Swit in the shower and then Alan Alda
would wring his hands sensitively. My father (infantry, World War II) had a
favorite scene in a service comedy: in No Time for Sergeants , when Andy
Griffith made those toilet seats stand at attention. Not strictly speaking a
war picture, but it was very, very funny.

            I suppose it is better
for News Quiz to risk being overly dark than to risk being overly Stephen
Ambrose, who seems to find war, at least World War II, so thoroughly enjoyable
that we should do it again and again. The millions died delightfully.

            
               Evil of Banality
Answer
            

            Group 1: bad NATO stuff. Group 2: good NATO
stuff.

            While cops stood idly by, mobs trashed the buildings
listed above, but they spared the Levi's outlet across the street from the
American Center, and rentals of that marvelous Nora Ephron movie remain high,
notes Steven Erlanger in the New York Times , so some good has come from
these tragic events.

            The worst part of the
bombings? They're boring and there's nothing on television. Erlanger quotes one
Serb: "There is a deepening sense of boredom--the war is really very boring,
especially with this monotonous war propaganda on the news. My son is bored; he
can't go out, except to visit friends in their shelters, where it's boring. My
little one is bored, because all her favorite cartoons like Power Rangers have
been replaced by those interminable news programs."

            
               Either/Or
Extra
            

            

               "They deny everything. They essentially say to their very best customers
that you get what's coming to you for believing us."-- lawyer William Gaylord
refers either to the ad campaign for The Mod Squad that lured hundreds
of Americans to theaters, or to Philip Morris, which was just ordered by an
Oregon jury to pay $81 million to the family of a dead Marlboro smoker
               

                "They are important when they bring in tourists. If not, they are
not."-- Ignatius Byamugyisha refers either to Cher's breasts, which could
attract hundreds of people to the Universal Studios Tour, or to endangered
Ugandan gorillas whose habitat is coveted by local farmers
               

               "Man, if I can continue to do that good, who knows? The sky's the
limit."-- Rudolph Giuliani is either cheerfully befuddled about his
plummeting approval ratings or gigglingly mean about the support he's reaped
from an anti-Hillary Clinton Web site
               

               "This is the first time in all my visits that they've given me a hopeful
sign."-- Motion Picture Association of America Chairman Jack Valenti refers
either to his midnight break-ins at the Baldwin brothers compound or to his
trip to China to promote American movies
               

            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            The odd misconception that NATO would bomb the
American Center.

         
      
   
