
   
   
      
         
            No. 215: &quot;Here's the Pitch&quot;

            

               Fill in the blank. After creating the highest-rated movie ever made for
Showtime, Warren Weideman is about to make four sequels, but the project was a
tough sale. "Most producers eyes would glaze over as soon as I said the words,
'____________.' "
            

            by noon
ET Tuesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's Question
(No. 214)--"Nutkin":
            

            

               You give the brief lead; I give the headline from London's
Independent : "Letter Reveals Nutkin Was a Savage Squirrel"
            

            "My
God! Mad Cow disease has mutated! Run for the hills!"-- Tim "Why, Yes, I'd
Love Some Wasabi Polenta" Carvell
            

            
"Despite revelations, Pat Buchanan still stands by his campaign
manager."-- S. Bell
            

            "Ha!
That got your attention. Now, back to the tariff implications of EMU
membership."-- Jennifer Miller
            

            "Fergie
wins Royal Anagram contest for her positively bitchy entry: 'Queen wears rags
at rave; rants like evil slut.' "-- Brooke Saucier
            

            
"Squirrel Nutkin was a bitter, resentful recluse who secretly despised
Twinkleberry and goaded Old Mr. Brown into violence, according to a collection
of correspondence published by former lover Joyce Maynard."-- Chris
Thomas
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            The daily coverage of
Kosovo, Microsoft, and Rudolph Giuliani teaches this lesson: It's futile to
read the newspaper. Salient details are always concealed, key decisions are
always made in private, and the ink gets all over your hands. Review the
dailies from 1942 or 1929 or 1863, and you'll come away with a similar
impressively false sense of the great events of the day. So why persist in
newspaper reading? For one thing, it lets you participate in the ongoing
conversation that is a nation's culture. One doesn't wish to stand silently by
while others merrily exchange misinformation about Albania, the NYPD, and
computer viruses. (That's why millions of decent Americans watch Just Shoot
Me : It'll be the talk of the schoolyard tomorrow. Surely not because it is,
in any meaningful sense, good.) For another thing, the news provides a myth
system for a secular age, giving us figures of good and evil, around whom we
can construct tales of ... well, OK, figures of evil and more evil. But perhaps
the utility of newspapers--their ability to provide truth and understanding--is
beside the point. One buys them for other reasons: for powerful photographs,
now often in color, of underwear models; for a chance encounter with an
embarrassing detail about Ron Perelman; and perhaps most of all, for that
lovable Marmaduke cartoon. At 60 cents, it's a bargain!

            
               Squirrelicious
Answer
            

            "A letter in which Beatrix Potter reveals that one
of her best-loved fictional creations, Squirrel Nutkin, was based on a pet
squirrel with behavioural problems is expected to fetch up to £15,000 at
auction," reports Kathy Marks.

            Writing in 1903, six months before the publication
of The Tale of Squirrel Nutkin , Potter notes: "I bought two squirrels,
but the one called Nutkin--who was much the handsomest--was so very savage I
was obliged to take him back to the shop. So I have only one now, called
Twinkleberry."

            Rosemary Franklin, the
letter's owner, learned its value when she took it to BBC Television's
Antiques Roadshow .

            
               Scrupulous
Extra
            

            Some corrections from
today's New York Times :

            

               It was Anna, not Alice.

               He is a Republican, not a Democrat.

               He was a captain, not a lieutenant.

               It is Silbury Hill, not Avebury.

               The group's name is Ninos Con Bombas, not Todos
los Manos.

            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Rocky and Bullwinkle and
Margaret Thatcher.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of Slate and will be
published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may
publish your name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
