
   
   
      
         
            Refugee Showdown

            The European press engaged
in name-calling Wednesday over the handling of the Kosovar refugee crisis. In
an exclusive interview with La Stampa of Turin, Italy, NATO Secretary-General Javier
Solana said that after much debate European countries had agreed that 120,000
refugees should be airlifted to Western Europe. But the Guardian of London
reported on its front page that the countries of the European Union are "at
loggerheads" on the issue and insist that they can absorb no more than a
10 th of the one million Albanian Kosovars ousted by Serbia. The
countries are heading for a showdown over which of them will accept refugees,
how many, at what cost, and on what terms, the paper said.

            On the Guardian 's
op-ed page, columnist Polly Toynbee attacked British government policy, saying
"it's not body bags the Government fears at the moment, it's live Kosovan
bodies swamping our shores." In another British liberal paper, the Independent , France
was condemned for its initial refusal, subsequently reversed, to accept any
refugees, with reference to the "similar attitude struck during the Bosnian
war," and Germany was attacked for "drastically reducing the numbers it had
been expected to take."

            France's leading newspaper, Le Monde , said in an
editorial Wednesday that the French government has "good and solid reasons" for
not wanting to accept the Kosovars--that to do so would be to condone "ethnic
cleansing" and to play Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic's game. But it
added that Prime Minister Lionel Jospin's position would be clearer and less
subject to the suspicion that he was only worried about reopening the country's
immigration debate, if he carried his argument to its logical conclusion. This
being that the refugees can only be returned to Kosovo if there is some kind of
intervention on the ground. "The defence of the right of the refugees to return
home is a slogan empty of meaning if one continues to exclude categorically the
committal of ground troops," the editorial concluded.

            Like Solana in his
interview with La Stampa ,Western European newspapers stand united
behind NATO's outright rejection of Milosevic's cease-fire offer, and the idea
of sending in ground troops seems to be gathering ever stronger support. But
Secretary-General Solana stressed the limitations of the NATO offensive. "One
can't do miracles with countries with pilots who belong to countries that have
parliaments," he said. "One has to go forward step by step. General [Wesley]
Clark, furthermore, has two constrictions: to safeguard the lives of the pilots
and to guarantee that there is no collateral damage. So this is not a war in
the classic sense but a military campaign." The conservative Daily Telegraph of
London said in an editorial that Milosevic's promised respite from "hounding,
killing and raping Kosovars does not begin to meet alliance requirements." The
alliance should keep in mind the "infamy of what is happening and hold true to
the principles of democracy, individual liberty and the rule of law which its
founding treaty proclaims."

            The Israeli papers continued to wrestle Tuesday (they were
not published Wednesday) with the analogies between the Kosovo crisis and the
Holocaust and with Israel's wartime debt to the Serbs. "As a Jew, I am sure it
is my obligation to come to the aid of Milosevic's victims in Kosovo," Elie
Wiesel, author, Holocaust survivor, and Nobel Peace Prize laureate, wrote on
the front page of Yediot Aharanot . "Some say that when we, the Jews in
Europe, needed the world's intervention, no one came to our help. But does that
mean we must be indifferent today? On the contrary. What the world did not do
then, it is doing now." Yet he dismissed comparisons between Milosevic and
Adolf Hitler: "What is happening in Kosovo is not a Holocaust. A Holocaust is a
genocidal plan. Milosevic is committing grave crimes, but the comparison of
other disasters to the Holocaust has led to the diminution of its significance.
Every disaster has become a Holocaust and every criminal a Hitler."

            While the Russian papers Wednesday gave top billing
to domestic stories, especially the arrest warrant for President Boris
Yeltsin's tycoon friend Boris Berezovsky on charges of money laundering, they
covered the Kosovar refugee crisis in a manner often strongly critical of the
Western alliance. Izvestia said the West was losing its image as a
"wise, democratic, and civilized collective force ... Rather, as represented by
NATO, the West is doing insane things, contrary to the fundamental principles
of democracy." "Allegedly for the sake of their own salvation, the Kosovar
Albanians are being crushed from the air along with Serbs and Montenegrans.
Trying to prevent the Kosovars' mass exodus to Europe, NATO did nothing but
provoke it by its air strikes. The West's civilizing role seems to involve the
destruction, for the first time since Hitler, of Europe's most beautiful
cities. ... A game with no rules has started in the world, and one beyond the
limits of law, too. There is only one step from this to the apocalypse," it
said.

            Finally, an apology: In
a last week, I mistakenly referred to an article in the Toronto Globe and Mail
attacking the NATO air strikes as an editorial, when it was in fact a signed
piece by Marcus Gee.

             

         
      
   
