
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Dowism
            

            In "," Bruce Gottlieb, like Clive Crook before him,
thinks he has found a flaw in our argument that stocks are undervalued. He has
not. In a 
                  Slate
                "" last year, Crook claimed that we were
contending that the value of a company is the present value of its stream of
future earnings and that such a contention was false. Gottlieb's piece, in an
easy-to-follow way, demonstrates Crook's argument that, if you value a firm by
discounting its earnings, and all earnings are not paid out in dividends, then
you are double-counting.

            But the problem with what Crook and Gottlieb are
saying is that we never based our theory on earnings but instead, as we
wrote in our Wall Street Journal piece on March 17, 1999, on the "money
a stock will put in your pockets through the profits generated by the company
that issued it." Neither in this year's piece nor in our March 30, 1998,
Journal piece did we claim that all those profits--or
earnings--would go into your pockets. What we said explicitly was that the
proper figure to use to measure the cash generated by a company was somewhere
between the lower bound of the dividend that a firm pays and the upper bound of
its official after-tax earnings. Indeed, in our first piece we explicitly
highlighted the fact that earnings are a problematic measure of cash flow
because of the potential that a firm might grow simply through retentions.

            But Crook and Gottlieb are intelligent,
well-intentioned journalists. What led them astray? They both cite an argument
against our first piece raised by Jeremy Siegel of the Wharton School. He
claimed that it is a "mistake" to assume that dividends per share will post
real growth, as we did in our calculations, because dividends, in theory,
should only just keep up with inflation.

            Crook and Gottlieb appear to have been convinced
that real earnings growth only reflects retentions and that real dividend
growth must be zero. While Siegel's point fits the simplest introductory
economic models, it is contradicted by the facts: Historical data on dividends
reveal significant real growth of dividends per share. For example, in the
latest edition of Siegel's excellent book Stocks for the Long Run , Table
5-1 on Page 79 shows that the growth of real dividends per share has been 2.1
percent on average since 1946 and positive since the 19 th century.
(In our calculations, we assume 2.1 percent real growth in dividends.)

            What Siegel, Crook, and Gottlieb say can't
happen--dividends growing faster than inflation--has been going on for almost
130 years. Where has all this growth come from? We treat that question at
length in our book, relating the observation to theories at the frontier of the
branch of economics known as "Industrial Organization," but here is a hint: The
simplest textbook model of the perfectly competitive firm doesn't do a great
job of describing the companies that have driven the market higher and
higher.

            Discounting dividends is uncontroversial, and the
fact that they grow is clear. It is interesting that Gottlieb says that, on the
strength of dividends alone, the Dow should be about 14,000 using our theory.
That is a good start. Even sticking with dividends alone, the number is pushed
considerably higher than that if one accounts for repurchases and the tax
advantage associated with them. So much for the crazy stock market bubble. Dow
14,000 is clearly a lower-bound estimate. Today, many enormous firms don't pay
dividends at all. These firms have value because, ultimately, they will deliver
cash to their shareholders.

            Crook and Gottlieb think that all valuation
techniques are out the window for firms that don't pay dividends, but they are
misinformed. There is a very large peer-reviewed academic literature on this
topic. The basic idea is simple: You can base a value measure on earnings
instead of dividends if you can identify those things that you are
double-counting and make sure that you only count them once. For example,
earnings themselves are a reasonable measure of the dividend that you use to
construct the value of the firm if all earnings are paid out each year. Such an
example is no pipe dream. Real Estate Investment Trusts, for example, pay out
95 percent of their earnings, and many of them post earnings growth well above
inflation year after year. In 1999 alone, REITs, on average, are expected to
increase their earnings by 10 percent, with inflation at about 2 percent. When
firms retain lots of earnings it gets more complicated, with the growth of
earnings increasing as more and more cash is retained in the firm. For those
who can't wait until the fall release date of our book Dow 36,000 and
want to start thinking through these issues, check out the Spring 1995 issue of
the journal Contemporary Accounting Research , which provides a number of
valuable review articles of the some of the relevant academic work.

            It is impossible to
address every conceivable objection in a short article in the Wall Street
Journal or 
                  Slate
               , which is one reason we are writing our
book. We look forward to picking up this debate in the fall when we lay all our
facts and arguments on the table. Until that time, we have a little homework
assignment for Gottlieb and anyone else at 
                  Slate
                who would like
to try. Microsoft's earnings have grown at an average rate of about 25 percent
annually over the past 10 years. Microsoft pays no dividends. Were all
Microsoft's earnings consumed in running in place, as Gottlieb's model
suggests? Should Microsoft be worth nothing since it doesn't pay an actual
dividend today? Was the price increase over that period justified? What would a
fair price for Microsoft be if the risk premium were zero? We look forward to
their answers.

            

               --James K. Glassman and Kevin Hassett Washington

            
               
                  Bruce Gottlieb
replies:
                
               Glassman and Hassett write in to say I have
misrepresented their argument. They do not, they say, value a stock by looking
at future earnings. They even agree that this would be a big mistake. They
claim to look instead at future cash flows to stockholders. The two authors
might want to reread their original WSJ article, which says: "Assume
that after-tax earnings are a reasonable estimate of the cash flow from a
stock." In other words, there is no difference between my description of their
argument and their own.
            

            
               Meanwhile, they have misrepresented my
argument. My article does not say or imply that "real earnings growth only
reflects retentions and that dividend growth must be zero" or that "all
valuation techniques are out the window for firms that don't pay dividends." It
simply asserts that, in calculating a firm's potential value, you can't assume
that earnings are simultaneously retained and paid out--and that the
Glassman-Hassett argument depends on precisely these conflicting assumptions.
The argument is fallacious whether all the earnings are paid out, all are
retained, or anything in between.
            

            
               Glassman and Hassett now claim that they will
sort out the components of retained earnings to avoid double-counting in their
forthcoming book. I look forward to it. But I boldly predict it won't work
unless they have an entirely new thesis, since double-counting of corporate
earnings is the core of their current one. The thesis is simply wrong and
cannot be refined into sense. What's more, double-counting of all corporate
earnings is how they get the figure in their title-- Dow 36,000 --so
that will have to go if they even start down Refinement Road.
            

            
               It's obvious that
our discussion must rest until this ambitious book is published. For right now,
it is worth noting that this letter is the first place where Glassman and
Hassett have explicitly admitted that equating earnings and dividends is a
mathematical sin. They refer to it as "double-counting," which indeed it
is.
            

            
               Speaking With the
"Enemy"
            

            I've never read a more paranoid piece of writing
then James J. Cramer's "." At the risk of being lumped into Cramer's "legion of
enemies," I thought it worth highlighting some of the absurdities in the
piece.

            Cramer writes that "[TokyoMex's] online following
... is much bigger than mine. And my record of giving good financial guidance,
publicly and privately, is better than his. So why the fuss over me while other
portfolio managers write every day about their stock picks and get no heat?"
TokyoMex's activities deserve notice, but it's ridiculous to say that his
following (via his own small Web site and Silicon Investor chat rooms) is
bigger than Cramer's (whose thoughts have been distributed through not only
TheStreet.com, but also ABCNEWS.com, Good Morning America , GQ ,
Yahoo! Squawk Box , SmartMoney , Time , and Politically
Incorrect , among other media properties with vast audiences). TokyoMex may
be unsavory, but Cramer just sets him up as a straw man to burn him. Just
because Cramer is more ethical than an infamous pump-and-dumpster doesn't mean
that his unusual position as both professional money manager and professional
financial journalist--and yes, it is unusual--isn't deserving of scrutiny and
criticism. The dual role is Cramer's gimmick, and more power to him for having
the energy to exploit the possibilities inherent in straddling two worlds. I
find his columns entertaining more often than not. But his situation isn't
common, so the argument of "everyone does it, why pick on me?" isn't
relevant.

            Then Cramer says, "I don't write for the money, and
I don't write for the notoriety, so giving them up wouldn't hurt." If it's
true, then give up your $250,000 salary and your stock options in
TheStreet.com, stop writing about your personal life in your musings, and
remove the iconic projection of yourself from your Web site. You don't have to
stop providing the insights that only you can give to the ignorant investing
masses in order to forgo the money and fame that come along with your position.
And, frankly, you shouldn't have to. But do us all the favor of not acting like
you're just being noble.

            Cramer continues, "[T]here is no difference between
a portfolio manager who recommends stocks in an interview to a reporter ... and
a portfolio manager who recommends stocks in a column of his own." Say what?
Extending that logic, there's no difference between a government that promotes
its policies to an independent press and a government that runs its own
newspapers. The second of the two scenarios Cramer describes conflates the
interested role of the portfolio manager with the presumably disinterested role
of the journalist. Don't tell me there aren't ethical challenges in that beyond
those posed by the first scenario.

            Finally, Cramer writes, "The journalists who would
stop me are complicit with that ignorance and are willing tools of those that
would like the reader to have to rely on those who charge high commissions or
high fees to unknowing, worried consumers of finance." This is a low blow. The
general tone of Cramer's piece is dismissive of financial journalists (or at
least those who would criticize him) as know-nothings or, worse, conspirers
with the dark forces of the finance industry. But I've read Alan Abelson (the
only "enemy" Cramer refers to by name) off-and-on since I first got interested
in investing, and whatever else he is, he isn't a "tool" of the industry. Nor
are the vast majority of financial journalists. Sure, there are some hacks, but
most are intelligent folks who have the interests of their readers at the top
of their agenda. Cramer notes that if investors don't find his writing worthy,
he will "disappear from the writing firmament." Well, isn't that what would
happen to the "established" business press that Cramer so disdains, if his
accusations were even partly true?

            I really do like
TheStreet.com and 
                  Slate
               , and I have my own conflicts (I work for
Morningstar, whose site at www.morningstar.net is a competitor to
TheStreet.com, a supplier to MoneyCentral, etc.). But Cramer's screed didn't
reflect well on your publication or his. 
                  Slate
                has been
(unwittingly?) caught in the cross-fire that has been going on for a few years
between Alan Abelson and James Cramer. It would have been better if your
editors had dispatched the enviably good James Surowiecki to cover the feud, or
if you had invited the two to duke it out in a "Dialogue." Luckily, I don't
have to cancel my subscription to your zine in a fit of pique!

            
-- Cebra Graves New York City

            
               Good and Necessary
Evil
            

            Terry Jeffrey
perpetuates an old shibboleth when he mentions Bill Clinton's "safe, legal, and
rare" comment regarding abortion (see ). Jeffrey asks how we could want any
good thing to be rare. Presumably American involvement in World War II was a
good thing--yet I doubt anyone would want it to happen again. There are other,
less dramatic, examples; surely David Kaczynski's decision to alert the FBI to
his brother's suspicious activities was the right choice. Nonetheless, few of
us would want to face that decision ourselves--even if we are confident that we
would have chosen similarly. Not all moral choices are painless. One can want a
particular practice to be rare just because it is painful, even if it is
morally required (and not just permissible). So there is no contradiction in
wanting abortions to be safe, legal, and rare.

            
-- Ananda Gupta Bethesda, Md.

            

               
                  Terry Jeffrey responds:
                
               This rejoinder employs
faulty logic. U.S. involvement in World War II was a good thing and, hopefully,
not rare. I would hope that the United States would defend itself every time a
fascist power bombs Pearl Harbor. Likewise, I would hope that David Kaczynski's
good thing in informing the FBI of evidence bearing on his brother's guilt was
also not a rare thing. I would hope that every time Kaczynski, or anybody else
for that matter, discovers that a brother of his is an environmentalist
extremist bent on murdering people, that he will inform the FBI of this
evidence. If abortion, like defending oneself against fascists and
environmentalist murderers, is a good thing, than it should not be rare. Good
behavior should never be rare. It should be routine.
            

            
               
                  Time Is
Money
            

            I have great respect and admiration for Marshall
Loeb (that's not a throwaway line; I really do), but his explanation that he
was getting paid by Time , not the advertisers, is kind of funny (see
"Culturebox: "). Imagine how 
                  Slate
                and others would slice me up
if you found out I was running a magazine about journalism--one that some call
a "watchdog"--and was getting paid writing assignments from one of the
organizations I was supposed to be watching and, of course, not disclosing it
on the pages of the magazine whenever the magazine writes about that
organization. You'd probably even get a great quote from Marshall saying how
troubled he is by it. Might they cancel future assignments if a piece in the
magazine really stings them? Might they add on assignments if a piece
celebrates them? Mightn't it all just look bad even if everyone behaves
honestly?

            For you to let that
explanation go uncommented on was surprising. Seems to me that getting paid by
Time , as opposed to advertisers whom the Columbia Journalism
Review is not nearly as likely to be covering, is a bigger issue.

            
-- Steve Brill New York City

            
               Called on the
Carpetbagger
            

            In "," David Greenberg
says that "for some politicians, such as Arizona's John McCain, living in an
adopted home state doesn't seem to matter at all." Actually, when McCain first
ran for the House of Representatives, he was accused of being a carpetbagger.
His reply was that, being a military child, he had moved around his whole life,
and in fact, the longest he had ever lived in one place besides Arizona was
when he was a prisoner of war for five and a half years in Vietnam! Needless to
say, the accusation did not do for the competition what they hoped it would, as
the reply was a large part of what won him his seat.

            

               --James Wartell Tucson, Ariz.

         
      
   
