
   
   
      
         
             Lethal Weapons

            Tuesday, a week after the Colorado high-school
massacre, President Clinton proposed new gun control legislation and asked
Americans to rethink the issue. "We've got to keep working until people start
thinking about this stuff the same way they think about X-rays and metal
detectors at airports," he declared at a White House ceremony. "We have to
redefine the national community so that we have a shared obligation to save
children's lives." To the gun control advocates in attendance, Clinton pleaded,
"You change the culture, we'll change the laws."

            Clinton's speech was a textbook illustration of how
to use a national trauma to reframe an issue. Congress has opposed gun control
for years. By changing the "culture"--i.e., the way voters "think about"
firearms--Clinton hopes to swing public opinion in favor of gun restrictions.
In the past, he observed, rural Americans have thought of guns in terms of
hunting and the right to bear arms. In the future, Clinton wants Americans to
think of guns in new terms: bombs and kids. His strategy is threefold.

            
               1. 
               Co-opt the "culture"
argument. Opponents of gun control have framed the debate as a choice
between blaming weapons and blaming people who abuse them. "Guns don't kill
people; people kill people," goes the famous slogan. Since conservatives tend
to oppose pornography and divorce as well as gun control, they get a twofer by
attributing tragedies such as the one in Colorado to a degenerating "culture."
Monday, Republicans put out the word that House Speaker Dennis Hastert and
Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott were going to kick off a "national dialogue
on youth and culture" to address nongun-related causes of the massacre.

            Clinton tried to neutralize the importance of
culture by acknowledging it. In her opening remarks, Hillary Clinton invoked
prayer and religion and repeatedly charged that the "culture of violence" in
television, movies, music, video games, and the Internet "is having a profound
effect on our children" and "causes more aggression and anti-social behavior."
"We must resolve to do what we can to change that culture," she proposed. Both
Clintons claimed that several of their pet causes and projects were
ameliorating anti-social conduct: V-chips, children's television, Internet
filters, and mental health awareness. By suggesting that the cultural causes of
violence were being sufficiently addressed, they sought to shift attention and
pressure to the remaining factor: guns.

            
               2. 
               Focus on kids. Adults
who can't stand the idea of the government telling them what to do are usually
willing and often eager to have the government impose identical restrictions on
teen-agers. So the Clintons aimed their legislation and rhetoric at kids and
young adults. "Guns and children are two words that should never be put
together in the same sentence," argued Hillary Clinton, who managed to squeeze
off countless criticisms of guns in between her eight invocations of "our
children." President Clinton repeatedly drew applause as he announced proposals
to "raise the legal age of handgun possession from 18 to 21 years" and "prevent
juveniles who commit violent crimes from ever buying a gun."

            
               3. Equate guns with bombs.
Americans love rights and recreation but hate crime and mayhem. The most
important element of Clinton's strategy, therefore, is to get the public to
stop associating guns with hunting and self-protection and to start associating
them with explosives and terrorism instead. "We have a huge hunting and sport
shooting culture in America," Clinton observed. But "I want to make a plea to
everybody who is waiting for the next deer season in my home state to think
about this in terms of what our reasonable obligations to the larger community
of America are. ... Next time you get on an airplane, think about how you'd
feel if the headline in the morning paper right before you got on the airplane
was 'Airport Metal Detectors and X-Ray Machines Abolished as Infringement on
Americans' Constitutional Right To Travel.' ... And right next to it there is
another headline: 'Terrorist Groups Expanding Operations in the United States.'
"

            To fortify this unorthodox analogy, the Clintons
bound guns and bombs together in their legislation and in their analysis on the
Colorado tragedy. While Hillary Clinton preached against juvenile access to
"bomb-making materiel" and decried "the arsenal of guns, rifles, and bombs that
the two young men in Littleton were able to bring into their school," President
Clinton earned another ovation by proposing to "require Brady background checks
on anyone who wants to buy explosives."

            If opponents of gun
control don't recognize soon how the emerging prominence of kids and explosives
is transforming the nation's image of deadly weapons, Clinton may succeed in
reshaping the debate and turning the political tide against guns. Advocates of
gun rights say Clinton is "exploiting this tragedy in Littleton to further his
gun control agenda." Of course he is. They're missing the point. Politicians
don't ban guns. Politicians with persuasive arguments ban guns.

         
      
   
