
   
   
      
         
            I Like Mike

            When
Richard J. Daley was alive and mayor of Chicago, no one gave him a harder time
than Mike Royko did. Maybe the funniest piece Rokyo ever wrote was an extended
parody of one of Daley's frequent solecisms. Daley, responding to his critics,
once uttered the phrase "Like a guy said a long time ago: 'He who hasn't
sinned, pick up the first stone.' " Royko riffed on this through an entire
column, as in:

            

               Moses,
leading the Israelites out of Egypt: "Let's get out of here."

               Ahab,
sighting the Great White Whale: "Let's all get that fish."

               
Douglas MacArthur. leaving the Philippines in 1942: "Let's all come back here
some time."

            

            In a less madcap vein, Rokyo wrote Boss , a
devastating portrait of the Daley machine and probably the best book ever
written about city politics.

            Yet when Daley dropped
dead of a heart attack in 1976, Royko sat down at his typewriter and banged out
a column that was both an interpretation and an appreciation. Daley's abuse of
the English language didn't offend people who weren't "that far removed from
parents and grandparents who knew only bits and pieces of the language," Royko
wrote. The mayor's abuse of power didn't bother those who had lived through far
worse: "The people who came here in Daley's lifetime were accustomed to someone
wielding power like a club, be it a czar, emperor, king, or rural sheriff,"
Royko noted. "The niceties of the democratic process weren't part of the
immigrant experiences. So if the Machine muscle offended some, it seemed like
old times to many more." It's hard to imagine a political scientist--or any
other journalist for that matter--framing it so simply, or so well.

            Reading these gems in the new posthumous selection, One
More Time: The Best of Mike Royko , I found myself wondering: Why doesn't
anyone write a newspaper column this good anymore? Royko wasn't quite a Twain,
or a Mencken, but his writing was distinctive and memorable and in its time the
closest thing to lasting literature in a daily paper. Royko could make you
laugh and make you think, stir outrage at a heartless bureaucrat, or bring a
tear to the eye when he flashed a glimpse of the heart hidden beneath his hard
shell.

            He performed this range
of feats with a regularity and prominence that no city columnist, or any
national one, can match today. Royko wrote his 900 words five times a week,
sometimes six. Today the columnist who writes something decent twice a week is
a marvel. For the better part of 34 years, everyone in Chicago read him, first
in the Daily News , then in the Sun-Times after the Daily
News closed, then in the Tribune after Rupert Murdoch bought the
Sun-Times. (Even after Royko said that no self-respecting fish would be
wrapped in a Murdoch paper, "the Alien" refused to accept his resignation and
kept reprinting his old columns. This led Royko to write: "In Alien's Tongue,
'I Quit' is 'Vacation.' ") Royko's fame spread nationally despite the fact that
he seldom left Chicago and refused to do television. By the time he died in
1997, he was syndicated in 600 papers around the country.

            Royko's hold came in part from his sense of place. He grew
up in the Polish neighborhood on the northwest side of Chicago that Nelson
Algren captured in one of Royko's favorite books, The Neon Wilderness ,
and he never left it in spirit. Royko's father was a milkman, and the family
lived over a tavern. Before finding his way into journalism, Royko already had
experience "setting bowling pins, working on a landscape crew, in a greasy
machine shop, and in a lamp factory and pushing carts around a department
store," as he noted in 1990. When he said he became a writer because it was
easier on the feet, he half meant it. To his working class and
working-class-once-removed readers, Royko was, like Daley, "one of us."

            But where Daley often
drew on the worst side of ethnic Chicago--its tolerance of corruption, its
parochialism and racial prejudice--Royko spoke to its better instincts. A
neighborhood populist, he celebrated the corner tavern and the weekend softball
game. But Royko also challenged white Chicago's prejudices, skewering bigots
who tried to keep a white couple that had adopted a black baby out of their
neighborhood or a funeral parlor that didn't want to bury a black soldier
killed in Vietnam. In the column he wrote the day after Harold Washington
became the first black person elected mayor of Chicago, Royko began with one of
his inimitable openings, "So I told Uncle Chester: Don't worry, Harold
Washington doesn't want to marry your sister."

            Of course, Uncle Chester, along with Slats Grobnik and Aunt
Wanda, didn't really exist. I'm sure that Sam Sianis, the proprietor of Royko's
beloved Billy Goat Tavern, didn't say many of the things Royko attributed to
him. I'm not sure how many of Royko's readers understood that much of what he
wrote was facetious or fictionalized. These days, newspaper writers are no
longer allowed the kind of license he took. As journalism has become less of a
trade and more of a profession, once common vices like embellishment,
plagiarism, and binge drinking have ceased to be regarded as charming. Mike
Barnicle, a second-rate Roykoesque columnist, was fired from the Boston
Globe for blending fiction and fact in a way that Royko did routinely.

            Nor is it possible for a
newspaper writer now to be as blunt as Royko was. In 1990, the University of
Missouri School of Journalism released a list of words for journalists to
avoid, including such terms as gorgeous, lazy, sweetie, and fried chicken.
"Fried chicken, fried chicken, fried chicken. I said it and I'm glad. Sue me,"
Royko wrote. His refusal to be sensitive got him in trouble in 1996, the year
before he died. In a column lampooning Pat Buchanan, Royko wrote that Mexico
was a useless country that should be invaded and turned over to Club Med. By
then, Royko's tone had grown increasingly bitter and his irony was easy to
miss. The result was an enormous protest outside the Tribune by Hispanic
groups that took his comments literally and demanded that he be fired.

            If journalism has changed since Royko's heyday, so too have
cities like Chicago. White ethnics have ceased to be the dominant force in
urban life. In 1981, when Royko moved to a condominium in a lakefront
high-rise, he cast himself as a bungalow-bred Margaret Mead, studying yuppies
by living among them. But yuppies--or at least the suburbanized offspring of
Slats Grobnik--were increasingly his audience and his newsroom colleagues.
Royko saw himself as more and more of an anachronism. Before he died, he quit
drinking and unhappily moved to the suburbs.

            So why don't we have newspaper columnists as good as
him anymore? To summarize: We no longer have his kind of newspaper. We no
longer have his kind of city. But mainly, we don't have another Mike Royko--a
newspaper writer grounded in a place like Chicago, with a gift for explaining
it to the world, and the world to it.

         
      
   
