
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Abort
Face
            

            What is especially enjoyable about the Republican
Party's agony over abortion is that the leading Republican lights are almost
surely pro-choice in their hearts. Not Pat Buchanan and not Gary Bauer, but
they're not the ones doing the agonizing. The agonizers are folks like
Elizabeth Dole and George W. Bush, and their agony isn't moral, goodness knows.
It's political: How to prevent the party's hard-line pro-life stance from
driving millions of voters away.

            Dole and Bush and Dan
Quayle and John McCain and Steve Forbes and the rest all claim to share the
hard-line anti-abortion view, as they must in order to be leading Republican
lights in the first place. But who believes them? Does Liddy Dole really think
abortion is equivalent to infanticide? Is George W. mourning over millions of
murdered babies every year? Not likely. So they must pretend to a deep moral
belief they probably don't have, then pretend to have come up with a reason
this deep moral belief shouldn't really matter. Even Bill Clinton might have
trouble executing this double-reverse flip-flop fib off the high board. Are
lesser pols up to it?

            The official Republican position on abortion, as expressed
in the past three GOP platforms, is so extreme that if it were taken seriously,
no Republican could be elected to any office except, perhaps, pope. Fortunately
for the GOP, few voters are aware of it, fewer still understand it, and those
who do understand it assume correctly that the party doesn't really mean
it.

            The platform reads: "The
unborn child has a fundamental individual right to life which cannot be
infringed. We support a human life amendment to the Constitution and we endorse
legislation to make clear that the Fourteenth Amendment's protections apply to
unborn children."

            The 14 th Amendment guarantees all persons "the
equal protection of the laws." If the fetus is a person under the
14 th Amendment, an abortion must be treated exactly like the
premeditated killing of an adult--that is, like first-degree murder. There can
be no exceptions for rape or incest. And the woman who procures an abortion is
guilty of murder just as if she had hired a gunman to kill her born offspring.
In a death penalty state--and the Republican platform favors the death penalty,
naturally--she must pay with her life.

            The 1996 platform goes
on to say, "we have only compassion" for women who procure abortions and "our
pro-life agenda does not include punitive action" against them. Which only
shows that the platform does not even believe itself, since that stuff about
the 14 th Amendment can have no other meaning.

            But the current Republican position is logically
consistent. If full human life begins at conception, then full human rights do
too, including the right to equal protection of the laws. It is a concept that
does not easily lend itself to compromise, as the Republican presidential
contenders are demonstrating. Their search for a way out has led most of them
to two rhetorical strategies.

            One is the notion the
late Lee Atwater called "the big tent." There's room for everybody. John McCain
says about the abortion issue, "I believe we are an inclusive party and we can
be so without changing our principles." What does this mean? Does it mean that
people should feel free to vote Republican even if they disagree with what the
Republican Party stands for? A nice offer, though I wouldn't expect many
takers. Or does it mean that because there are so many people to divvy up, the
two parties needn't stand for anything in particular? Not a big vote-getter
either.

            Asked about abortion the other day on CNN, Republican
National Committee Chairman Jim Nicholson also invoked what is apparently the
party-line phrase: "inclusive party." He elaborated, "We want to reach out and
grow this party. ...We're recognizing that there are differences. This is a
huge country. It's a continent really. There are 270 million of us, and there
are only two parties. So why wouldn't we have some differences?"

            It's surely true that it
would be suicidal for a party to demand agreement on all issues from either its
candidates or its voters. The tricky question is what are the core values that
really define you and what are the fringe issues on which differences are not
crucial. Republicans would prefer not to be defined by their position on
abortion. But if you take it seriously, the anti-abortion position is
definitive by definition. How can you make the capital gains tax a litmus test
issue but say that the slaughter of millions of innocent children is something
about which you have only a mild preference and don't care much if people
disagree? The truth is that most Republican leaders don't actually take their
alleged position on abortion seriously. But they can't admit this.

            The other rhetorical way out for Republican politicians is
to say that you yourself are as hard-core as ever, but since a majority of
Americans apparently disagrees, there's no point in trying to do anything about
it it. Elizabeth Dole goes further: There's no point in even discussing it.
Last week she called on Republican women to "set an example" and "refuse to be
drawn into dead-end debates" about something that is "not going to happen."
George W., sounding like a very promising cross between his father and Dan
Quayle, explained in March why he opposes pushing for a constitutional
amendment, although he favors one himself: "There are a lot of Americans who
don't view the abortion issue as a matter of life. I do. That's one reason why
I'm a pro-life person."

            This is an imaginative
attempt to dress craven pragmatism as high principle, but it makes no sense.
The Republican and Democratic platforms are littered with proposals that are
"not going to happen." Almost nothing is going to happen if a majority must
already favor it before any political leader will speak out in its favor. If
she actually believed that millions of human lives were at stake, the former
head of the Red Cross surely wouldn't try to build a holy crusade around
refusal to discuss the matter. Nor would she blame the media for an "inordinate
focus" on the issue.

            Lamar Alexander's way out is worth noting, though it
doesn't rise to the level of illogic. Lamar says that we should "move
state-by-state to change laws and culture so there will be fewer abortions,"
and therefore "I do not support a constitutional amendment that would overturn
Roe vs. Wade ." Well, you see, Lamar, Roe vs. Wade held that state
anti-abortion laws are unconstitutional. That's what it was all about!
Maybe--to give him the extreme benefit of the doubt--Lamar means that he favors
overturning Roe by Supreme Court decision rather than by constitutional
amendment. This is an unlikely occurrence and, combined with the state-by-state
business, a rather leisurely approach if you honestly believe that the
slaughter of innocents is going on daily.

            Finally, since the subject is Republicans, logic,
jurisprudence, and advanced metaphysical speculation, you're probably wondering
where Dan Quayle comes down. Quayle agrees with everybody else that a
constitutional amendment is not going to happen. "But that's not
important . The important issue is where you stand on this
important debate. I have always been pro-life." In other words, as long as you
profess to believe that human life begins at conception and that abortion is
murder, it's not important whether you actually do anything about it.

            This is, of course, a truer statement of the
Republican position on abortion than any other candidate's. But it is more than
that. Quayle may actually have produced a compromise in what seemed to be a war
of moral absolutes. Speaking, if I may, for the pro-choice side of the debate:
Pro-lifers may profess any principles they care to, as long as they agree not
to act on them. They can actually believe what they say, for all I care. Though
I doubt, in the case of most Republican presidential candidates, that this last
concession will be necessary.

         
      
   
