
   
   
      
         
            Greens Back Bombing

            

               Kosovo update: 1) Germany's Green Party, on which the German
government's survival depends, rejected a resolution demanding a permanent,
unconditional halt to NATO's bombing but approved a resolution calling for a
"limited halt" to let the Serbs withdraw troops from Kosovo. Hawks'
spin: Germany and the NATO coalition are standing firm behind the bombing.
Doves' spin: Germany is splintering, and the coalition can't last. 2)
Responding to NATO's mistaken bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade,
Chinese President Jiang Zemin called the United States a "hegemonist" that uses
its power to "wantonly interfere in the internal affairs of other countries.''
However, he also agreed to speak with President Clinton. Sinologists debated
whether the Chinese regime is sincerely paranoid or is feigning belligerence to
appease the Chinese public's paranoia. 3) Clinton changed his spin on Balkan
history. His old spin: NATO must intervene in the Balkans because ethnic
violence there has been awful for centuries. His new spin: NATO can heal the
Balkans because ethnic violence there has only recently become awful.

            

               Senate Republicans endorsed new gun restrictions. After
killing a Democratic measure that would have required background checks on all
customers at gun shows, they proposed a similar measure. They also voted to ban
sales of semiautomatic assault weapons to minors, and many of them voted for a
Democratic provision that would prohibit high-capacity ammunition clips from
being imported. President Clinton's spin on the GOP's initial vote against
background checks: "They passed up this chance to save lives." The spins from
liberal senators and editorialists: 1) Republicans are turning their backs on
the National Rifle Association because the public wants gun control. 2)
Republicans are helping the NRA stave off serious gun laws by pushing weaker
restrictions riddled with loopholes. 3) Even so, that's progress.

            

               The Justice Department filed an antitrust suit against American
Airlines. The suit accuses the airline of using short-term fare cuts
and service increases to drive away competitors in order to resume charging
high fares. It's the government's first suit over predatory pricing since
airline deregulation. The government's spin: We're busting illegal monopoly
tactics. The positive American Airlines spin: We're being busted for providing
better service at lower cost. The negative American Airlines spin: We're being
busted at the behest of our competitors. The competitors' spin: We're doing
well despite American's illegal monopoly tactics. The cynical spin: The suit
will help American's competitors attract investors.

            

               The House ethics committee cautioned House Majority Whip Tom DeLay,
R-Texas, that House members may not use their offices to punish organizations
for financial transactions with political parties. Reports depict the
action as a response to DeLay's attempts to pressure an industry lobbying group
to hire a Republican rather than a Democrat as its president. Although the
letter evidently just spells out House rules, the Washington Post said
it "chastised" DeLay, and the New York Times called it a "rebuke."
Campaign-finance watchdogs' spin: It's an attempt to curb DeLay's fearsome
power and ruthlessness. DeLay aides' spin: "The committee has disposed of this
matter." The lobbying group's spin: DeLay has "sensitized" us to the importance
of hiring Republicans.

            

               Russian President Boris Yeltsin fired Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov
and replaced him with the head of Russia's internal security forces.
This comes one day before the Russian parliament begins prescheduled
impeachment proceedings against Yeltsin. The Moscow stock exchange plummeted 10
percent, prompting officials to halt trading. Yeltsin's spin: Primakov failed
to save Russia's economy. The Clinton administration's spin: Don't worry,
Russia will continue to reform its economy and play a "constructive role" in
Kosovo. Other spins: 1) Yeltsin was unhappy because Primakov was failing. 2)
Yeltsin was jealous because Primakov was succeeding. 3) Yeltsin decided, as he
does every month or so, that it was time to fire his government. 4) Now that
Primakov is gone, economic reform can proceed. 5) Now that Primakov is gone,
the political system will collapse. 6) The parliament, which liked Primakov,
will respond by impeaching Yeltsin or forcing him to call new elections. 7) Now
that Russia is in turmoil, it can't help solve the crisis in Kosovo. 8) Now
that Russia is in turmoil, it can't cause further mischief in Kosovo.

            

               Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin is resigning. Deputy Secretary Lawrence
Summers will succeed him. The official explanation: Rubin wants to
return to "private life." The unofficial translation: He wants to resume making
boatloads of money. Rubin's fans hope he'll take over the Fed next year if
Chairman Alan Greenspan retires. The spins: 1) Rubin engineered the current
economic boom. 2) No, Greenspan did. 3) Neither of them did; they just got the
credit. Congressional Democrats lauded Rubin as their ally in the Cabinet.
Congressional Republicans lauded him as their ally in the Cabinet.
Pessimists sold their stocks because Rubin is leaving. Optimists bought the
stocks because they trust the economy he's leaving behind. (For more on Rubin,
see "")

            

               Marine Capt. Richard Ashby, the pilot whose jet severed an Italian ski
lift cable, killing 20 people, was sentenced to six months in military
prison. He was acquitted on manslaughter charges but convicted of
obstruction for destroying a videotape of an earlier part of the flight. The
upbeat spin: The obstruction conviction makes up for the manslaughter acquittal
by reaffirming (especially to angry Italians) that U.S. military misdeeds won't
go unpunished. The cynical spin: As with last week's bombing of the Chinese
Embassy in Belgrade and last year's bombing of a Sudanese chemical plant that
was evidently mistaken for a chemical weapons facility, the ski lift disaster
(attributed in part to government maps that failed to show the ski lift) proves
again that U.S. military intelligence is an oxymoron.

         
      
   
