
   
   
      
         
            No. 221: &quot;No Carrying On&quot;

            

               Fill in the blank on this comment by State Sen. Harry Wiggins, jubilant
over the voting on a new proposal: "Missourians do not want __________ carried
into football games and bars and schools."
            

            by noon
ET Thursday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question
(No. 220)--"Sticks and Stones":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 The list includes
beasts, criminals, villains, thugs, fascist legions, and hordes of murderers.
List of
what?
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            "The
'Important Numbers' section in Michael Eisner's Day Runner."-- Bill
Scheft ( Dennis Cass had a similar answer.)

            "Things
that 'do it' in Cole Porter's wisely discarded first draft."-- Daniel
Radosh
            

            "Maine
residents who had premarital sex."--Alex Pascover
            

            "I
don't expect you to believe me, but they're all thanked on that Dixie Chicks
CD."-- Chris Kelly
            

            "All
the cute, available guys."--Dale Shuger
            

             

             

             

             

             

             

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            It is instinctive to reject a patriotic list of
Official Enemies. The more these authorized villains are shot at in
Stallone-Schwartzenegger-Willis-Gibson movies, the more one wants to be a drug
dealer or terrorist when he grows up. Hollywood does glamorize everything.
(Except maybe Laurence Fishburne--what was he rambling on about in The
Matrix ? I dozed a bit there.)

            It is harder to rebuff a national enemies list when
bombs are falling, particularly when those enemies are implicated in appalling
deeds. It might, however, be possible to resist the grossest forms of jingoism.
Consider how badly certain World War II songs have aged--"I'm Going To Slap
That Dirty Little Jap." And those wartime Warner Bros. cartoons where Bugs
Bunny battles grotesque caricatures of the Japanese--they don't quite hold
up.

            So how to prevent outrage
at human suffering from tilting toward vile stereotyping? One guideline: The
more that anchormen get all huffy, the more you must be on your guard. When Dan
Rather reaches for the adjectives, be careful out there.

            
               Demonizing
Answer
            

            This is a list of terms used to refer to the NATO
alliance and its members, by order of the Serbian Information Ministry, reports
Steven Erlanger in the New York Times .

            On Serbian television,
President Clinton has been referred to as Bill Hitler, Adolf Clinton, and
Führer.

            
               Augmented
Quotations Extra
            

            Each final sentence added by News Quiz.

            

               "There is absolutely no evidence of cancer in his body. We were, however,
able to remove a large house cat that seemed to be making Minister Farrakhan
cranky and anti-Semitic."-- Dr. Abdul Alim Muhammad, on Louis Farrakhan's
successful surgery.
               

               "I shudder at the idea they will leave this haven. They are trusting. They
don't understand danger. They could end up inside the large intestine of
Minister Farrakhan.-- Stefania Caruso on the homeless cats of San Clemente, a
small island near Venice, Italy.
               

               "There's no scarring mark physically or mentally. Not like when we spank
their delicious bare bottoms with that nasty paddle ... ooooh!"-- George W.
Bush 
                  in a 1967 story about branding fraternity pledges with a hot wire
hanger, as recalled by Maureen Dowd.
               

               "I know there are going to be people who are cynical about this. I've been
mayor of New York City for too long not to realize that people will be cynical
about any good step that's made in the direction of decency. Idiots like that
should be shot 41 times!"-- New York's Mayor Giuliani 
                  on imaginary
criticism of his plan to give police officers wallet-sized cards listing tips
on interacting with the public. He seemed upset. It could be some kind of
feline intestinal blockage.
               

            

         
      
   
