
   
   
      
         
            

            
Kosovo update:
1) Yugoslavia declared "peace," said it had negotiated a political
accord with ethnic Albanian leader Ibrahim Rugova, urged ethnic Albanian
refugees to return to their homes, and called further NATO bombing an assault
on "peace, unity, and understanding." NATO and the United States ridiculed the
statements as lies, inadequate concessions, and a "charm offensive." 2) NATO
said the bombing has now cut off supplies to Serbian forces in Kosovo.
Skeptics said the news comes too late, since Kosovo has already been ethnically
cleansed. 3) Having closed the borders through which refugees had been fleeing,
the Serbs sent the refugees back into Kosovo. The official Serbian spin:
We're welcoming the refugees back. The half-cynical NATO spin: This is part of
the Serbs' pretense of reconciliation. The completely cynical NATO spin: The
Serbs need the refugees as human shields. (Check out "" for

                  Slate
               's latest coverage.) (4/9/99)
            

            

               Russia 
               is ratcheting up its threats 
               against
NATO over the bombing of Yugoslavia. President Boris Yeltsin said Russia
would "not permit" NATO to send in ground troops to make Yugoslavia its
"protectorate." Then the speaker of Russia's parliament said Yeltsin had
directed the targeting of Russian nuclear missiles at NATO countries .
This raised alarms throughout the world, until the speaker's office retracted
the claim and explained that Yeltsin had merely discussed the targeting option.
The spins: 1) Yeltsin is pretending to entertain this option to placate Russian
hard-liners. 2) He's nuts. 3) He's playing his usual cagey game. 4) He doesn't
understand that you don't play games with nukes. (4/9/99)
            

            

               President 
               Clinton and Chinese Prime Minister Zhu
Rongji failed to agree on terms for China's admission to the World Trade
Organization . Backstage reports say that the deal is nearly complete but
that the hostile atmosphere in Congress, particularly over reports of Chinese
espionage at U.S. nuclear labs, makes it futile for Clinton to push WTO
admission now. Zhu, who is visiting Washington, told reporters that 1) he has
"no knowledge" of the alleged nuclear espionage; 2) he is "impatient" to
improve China's human rights practices; and 3) if he had meant to influence the
1996 U.S. presidential election, he would have shelled out a lot more than the
$300,000 China is accused of funneling to the Clinton campaign. While holding
out against lucrative trade concessions demanded by Wall Street and Hollywood,
Zhu is offering to let American telecommunications firms own Chinese cell phone
and Internet companies, which presumably would undermine China's ability to
quash domestic dissent. The spins: 1) America will take this deal because we
care about freedom. 2) We'll reject it because we care about money.
(4/9/99)
            

            
The Y2K
"conceive-a-thon" is on. Medical experts have declared April 9 the
conception date most likely to lead to the first baby born on Jan. 1, 2000, and
many couples are reportedly competing for the honor/shame. The most
charming/egregious case is a contest among four couples, selected by a Boston
radio station from among hundreds of contestants, to conceive the "millennium
baby" in separate rooms of the same hotel today. If any of the couples
succeeds, the radio station will pay a $1 million prize. One contestant says
she asked her mother, "How does it feel to have a daughter that's going to be
in the public and everybody knows that she's going to have sex tomorrow?"
Meanwhile, CNN offered interested viewers advice about ovulation and timing,
concluding: "Ladies and gentlemen, start your engines." The spins on the race:
1) It's grand and fascinating. 2) It's sick and pitiable. 3) It's sick and
fascinating. (4/9/99)
            

            
Missouri
voters rejected a ballot measure 
               that would have allowed citizens to
carry concealed handguns . The National Rifle Association had spent $3.7
million to promote the measure. The sunny spins: 1) It's a victory over the gun
nuts. 2) It's a victory over big money. The cynical spins: 1) It's a victory
for the anti-militia Zeitgeist spawned by the Oklahoma City bombing. 2)
It's a victory for a well-funded scare campaign led by Hillary Clinton. The
political analyses: 1) It's a victory for suburban whites and urban blacks over
rural dwellers. 2) It's a victory for women over men. (4/7/99)
            

            
Scientists found
three 500-year-old Inca mummies on top of a volcano in Argentina. After
the Incas were ritually sacrificed, their corpses quickly froze in the cold
weather, leaving them so well preserved that their internal organs remain
intact and the hair on their arms is still visible. Religious artifacts that
were evidently part of the sacrifice were also recovered. The anthropological
spin: The mummies will teach us all about Inca religious practices. The medical
spin: They'll teach us all about Inca diet, health, and genetics. The cynical
spin: We owe it all to human sacrifice. (4/7/99)
            

            

               Libya 
               finally 
               handed over the 
               suspects
in the 
               1988 Lockerbie bombing case. The bomb blew up a Pan Am plane
over Scotland, killing 270 people, most of them Americans. The suspects, Abdel
Basset Ali al-Megrahi and Lamen Khalifa Fhimah, were sent to the Netherlands,
where they will be tried under Scottish law. In exchange, the 
               United
Nations 
               has lifted sanctions it imposed several years ago to punish
Libya for sheltering the suspects. The spins, in order of descending optimism:
1) It's a landmark in the establishment of effective international law. 2) It's
a triumph of negotiating perseverance by South African President Nelson Mandela
and the United Nations. 3) Even if the suspects are convicted, the bombing's
true mastermind, Libyan dictator Muammar Qaddafi, will escape justice.
(4/5/99)
            

            

               Serial 
               HIV spreader Nushawn Williams 
               was
sentenced to four to 12 years in jail. He was accused of infecting at least
nine women with HIV by knowingly exposing them to the virus through unprotected
sex in exchange for providing illegal drugs to them. His sentence is part of a
deal in which he pleaded guilty to statutory rape and reckless endangerment.
Williams' excuse for continuing to have unprotected sex after a nurse told him
he had the virus is that he didn't believe the nurse. His attorney's spin:
"He's not an evil person. ... He feels badly that he's ill. He expressed to me
the concern he may not live out his sentence." The naive retributive spin: He
should have been sentenced to death. The sophisticated spin: He has been.
(4/5/99)
            

            

               The 
               alleged author of the Melissa virus was
busted. David L. Smith, a New Jersey computer programmer, was arrested on
charges of conspiracy, theft of computer service, and interruption of public
communications. The virus jammed up the Internet by replicating itself in
multiple e-mails it transmitted from infected computers. The dramatic spin:
Smith is an ingenious villain, and the computer security companies that pursued
him were ingenious sleuths using sophisticated technology and techniques. The
boring spin: Smith is a 30-year-old bankrupt nerd, and America Online turned
him in by letting law enforcement officials see the log that showed which phone
line had been used to post the virus. (4/5/99)
            

         
      
   
