
   
   
      
         
            China Loves America's Bombs

            
According to the South China
Morning Post of Hong Kong Monday, the "minimum requirements" of even
moderates in the Chinese Politburo are that Washington issue a full apology for
the bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade, pay adequate compensation, and
allow China a bigger role in resolving the Kosovo conflict. But hard-liners,
who include generals of the People's Liberation Army, are calling for an
overall scaling down of U.S.-China relations unless NATO agrees to stop its
offensive against Yugoslavia, the paper said. In a report from Beijing on
emergency weekend meetings of senior Chinese cadres, the paper noted that the
PLA's Deputy Chief of Staff Gen. Xiong Guangkai insisted that the embassy
strike had been a deliberate attempt by the United States to trample on Chinese
sovereignty. Noting that the Chinese government has reserved the right to take
"further action," the generals said "they would do their best if that 'action'
contained a military component." Quoting "a Beijing source," the paper said,
"government-organized protests would continue at least through this week." It
also predicted that Foreign Trade Minister Shi Guangsheng and Prime Minister
Zhu Rongji will now reverse some of the concessions they granted to U.S. trade
negotiators.

            
According to a report from Beijing Sunday in the Straits Times of
Singapore, China's Liberation Army Daily , the mouthpiece of the PLA, had
been much impressed by America's bombing methods in Yugoslavia before the
embassy strike. Only last week, it urged China to change its defense strategy
so as to master U.S. precision-bombing techniques. In an article published last
week, the Liberation Army Daily said, "We have to use the Kosovo crisis
to raise the alarm, and work towards high-technology warfare, create new
warfare techniques and training methods." The newspaper said Beijing has not
done enough research on long-distance precision missile strikes. The Balkan
crisis will accelerate China's military modernization drive, it said. The
Straits Times said that, because of the Kosovo conflict and the United
States' promise of a new theatre-missile defense system for Taiwan, the PLA is
expected to intensify the development of intermediate or long-range missiles
and military communications technology.

            In an
editorial Monday, China Daily expressed its "stalwart moral support for the
protests that are blazing across the country against the US-directed NATO
atrocity." Insisting that the attack on the embassy was deliberate, the
editorial said it was "too smart to be explained as a 'mistake in target
identification' or a technical error." It asked, "Then what is the reason that
can convincingly explain Nato's provocation? ... Is it because of our country's
persistent opposition to their barbarity?" In its editorial Monday, the South China Morning Post
deplored the "blind arrogance" of NATO in believing it can drive a man like
President Slobodan Milosevic to capitulate through airstrikes alone, and it
said that the orchestrated protests in China are "understandable." But it also
said that claims that the bombing was no accident are "simply ludicrous," since
"Nato stood only to lose by its action." Calling on the United States and NATO
to "undertake a damage-limitation exercise in earnest," it said the most
important thing is for the United States to make "a proper and public apology.
Not words of sadness, but a formal expression of apology."

            The
papers in European NATO countries generally agreed that the bombing of the
Chinese Embassy was the worst thing that could have happened. They widely
credited it with having destroyed all hope for the peace principles agreed in
to Germany last week between the G-8 countries and Russia. There was bitter
mockery, too, of reports that the CIA was using old maps of Belgrade from a
time before the embassy was built. The Times of London published a headline Monday reading
"CIA planners failed to check phone book" and a map with an arrow pointing at
the Russian Embassy and the words "Note to CIA: 32 Deligradska Ulica, Belgrade
11000." Having been the most hawkish in Europe throughout the war, the British
press has started to show small signs of defeatism. On Sunday, for example, the
liberal Observer , which previously supported the bombing as a
prelude to a successful ground campaign, called Sunday for it to be scaled
down, deciding that a land war is no longer a practical possibility. "Without
it, compromise may allow us to achieve most of what we want," it concluded
hopefully.

            But
the Sunday
Times urged "escalating NATO's attacks to maximum pitch, redoubling its
efforts to avoid civilian targets, pushing ahead with plans for the use of land
forces, and keeping the diplomatic pressure on Milosevic to agree to terms." It
even said that "the fact that the embassy bombing has focused the attention of
the UN Security Council may be no bad thing." The Sunday Telegraph also urged
NATO to intensify the war effort, saying that "the problem with NATO's conduct
of the war is not that it is employing too much force. It is that NATO has not
used enough force to persuade the Serbs to behave in accordance with the
minimum of humanity." Accusing NATO's political leaders of pusillanimity, it
said: "NATO's equation seems to be simple: half a million Kosovars are not
worth one NATO pilot."

            The
Daily Telegraph Monday took the same line, criticizing President Clinton
for his "studied ambivalence" during his visit to Europe and saying that it
"suggests that he is still looking for a settlement on the basis of bombing
alone." Describing the attack on the Chinese Embassy as "a crass mistake," the
Telegraph said it made Clinton's aim harder to achieve than before, with
the result that "the air campaign will be prolonged as Kosovo is emptied of
ethnic Albanians and the support of Western public opinion for Alliance action
wanes. In such a quandary does the fear of taking casualties land you." Unlike
the Telegraph and the Times , which seem to have given up hope of
a land invasion, the liberal Guardian said Monday that the Chinese reaction to the embassy
bombing showed that "American interests are intimately bound up with the speedy
resolution of the Kosovo crisis." "Speed cannot now mean more bombs," it said.
"Speedy resolution could denote ... greater willingness by the Americans to act
on the ground."

            In
Paris, Le Monde
warned in an editorial Sunday that because of China's attitude a U.N. force in
Kosovo might no longer even have a NATO "core" if the Russian and Ukrainian
presences in it were too strong. Deploring this prospect, it said the essential
aim of getting the Kosovo refugees back to their homes could only be achieved
if the Kosovars have confidence in the force. "Its composition mustn't seem to
them like a compromise favorable to Belgrade , " Le Monde said, for
"if the hundreds of thousands of Kosovars chased from their land cannot return
there freely to reconstruct their future, the allied forces will have lost the
war."

            In Spain, El Mundo Sunday described
NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana and allied commander Gen. Wesley Clark as
"total incompetents." And it said that the heads of government who appointed
them "have taken on a grave responsibility by making themselves accomplices of
their imbecilic 'smart bombs,' thus delegitimizing the noble aims with which
this intervention was undertaken." In La Repubblica of Rome Sunday, the paper's founding
editor, Eugenio Scalfari, wrote, "We wanted an 'intelligent' military
intervention, but we have had the stupidest intervention imaginable," and he
proposed that NATO should definitively stop describing its war aims as
"humanitarian" so as to protect itself from ridicule. Scalfari described
Clinton and British Prime Minister Tony Blair as "unconscious extremists" who
were militating against peace as effectively as the extremists of Israel and Al
Fatah. "The latter are clear-headed, the former probably unaware, which is
almost worse."

         
      
   
