
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               With the Oscars newly behind us, a question
begs for resolution. It's common knowledge that many big box office stars often
borrow glittery gems for special occasions from the likes of Harry Winston,
etc. At the Golden Globe Awards, in pixel-perfect color viewed from
Barcaloungers around the world, we all gasped in horror when Miss Redgrave (the
one now embroiled in an almost Kentuckian divorce drama) lost an earring.
There, in front of the breathless masses, it fell from her ear while she, being
the consummate professional, continued without even seeming to notice. One
might have assumed that as soon as the camera panned elsewhere, she scooped up
the errant earring. However, for the rest of the event she was photographed
with only one earring.
            

            
               My question is this: Did she find the earring?
Was it borrowed or her own? Ah, for the good old days when there was no doubt
that Liz's diamonds were her own.
            

            
               Teleficially
yours,
            

            

               --S.D.
            

            

               P.S.: Now that Slate is free once again, do I have to return my
groovy umbrella?
            

            Dear S.,

            What an amusing
"problem" to offer Prudie ... who of course has no idea whether Ms. Redgrave's
errant earring was 1) retrieved or 2) borrowed. Just to free associate, Prudie,
herself, loves jewelry and is known to intimates as Sparkle Plenty. Alas, no
jewelers have ever offered to lend her any baubles.

            
--Prudie, sparklingly

            P.S.:
Consider the groovy umbrella a keepsake from the Messrs. Gates and Kinsley.

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               To return to the ""
discussion, my favorite response is "I'm told I'm great!" Gets a laugh every
time.
            

            

               --f.f.f.
            

            Dear f.,

            Tres charmante, and
risqué, aussi.

            
--Prudie, responsively

            
               
                  Dear
Prue,
               
            

            
               I have an old friend whom I dearly love who was
my roomie in college. We talk on the phone often and try to get together
regularly--shopping, dinner, etc.
            

            
               The only problem is
when she and her husband invite me over to their apartment. It's filthy and
disgusting! Cats crawl all over you, and the noxious fumes of the litter box
are enough to make you lose your appetite--or worse. The kitchen sink is filled
with dishes that have been there for days on end. From having lived with her
before, I always knew she was a clutter-bug but not unsanitary. I invite them
over to my place as often as possible, but I can only refuse going to theirs so
much before their feelings get hurt. How can I handle this?
            

            

               --Nauseously Yours
            

            Dear Nause,

            No one should be burdened by having to hold his
nose when paying a social call. Prudie offers you two ways to proceed. If you
are feeling faint of heart about leveling with your chum, simply refuse to
convene at the house that the cats have taken over. Prudie would hope, however,
that you would take a more direct approach, which might actually be doing a
kindness. Since you and this longtime pal have a history of warmth and
friendship, why not tell her the conditions in her home are way beyond the
"clutter-bug" stage, and you are worried about her health.

            Prudie has always felt there is something a little
nutty about people who are able to ignore an extreme mess and the sensibilities
of others. In the spirit of constructive advice, a word from you might focus
her attention and remedy the situation. If not, simply state that you can no
longer be a visitor to her home.

            --Prudie, hopefully

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I am about to launch
a campaign for public office. I would appreciate advice on how best to share
details of my life with voters. I grew up poor. My mother (from another
country) had an eighth-grade education and raised three children on her own. As
a result of poverty we were homeless a few times, and the kids spent some time
in foster care. Today we are all doing well. I have been able to achieve the
American Dream--a great postgraduate education, a good job, civic achievement,
and a wonderful family. I think this is an inspiring story of what is right
with America. My problem is that I want to avoid seeming as though I want
people to feel sorry for me because of the deprivations of my youth. At the
same time, I do want some credit for being able to overcome some serious
challenges. How do you think I should handle this information?
            

            

               --Democrat With a Dilemma
            

            Dear Dem,

            Prudie thinks you should relay this information in
your campaign speeches and literature just as you have in your letter. Your
remark about your personal history illustrating what is right with America is
the perfect approach. You would only elicit sympathy if the deck stacked
against you had caused you to fold your hand.

            Everybody loves a success
story, and triumph over adversity is always uplifting. Prudie wishes you
victory and, with luck, an opponent who prepped at St. Paul's before going on
to Harvard.

            
--Prudie, strategically

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               I am constantly fighting the battle of the
bulge. Everyone in my family is overweight. I, however, am determined to lose
weight and keep it off. The keeping it off is the problem. When I eat at home I
can control what's going on. When in a restaurant, I can somewhat control
things. When at dinner parties, however, I am totally at the mercy of the
menu.
            

            
               Do you have any
ideas for people in my situation? I know we must be legion.
            

            

               --Fighting Being a Butterball
            

            Dear Fight,

            Short of bringing your own dinner in a paper bag
(only acceptable for Carol Channing and people with severe food restrictions),
Prudie suggests you incorporate the following two ploys: Do not finish
everything you are served, and push the unconsumed portion around on your
plate.

            Prudie is becoming aware
of more and more people having a bite or two of desert, for example, and then
eating no more. And she is sympathetic to your plight. For some reason, even
hostesses who themselves try to eat nutritiously feel that dinner party fare
requires a feast, where everything on the plate is essentially a butter
sculpture.

            --Prudie, sparingly

         
      
   
