
   
   
      
         
             The Merchant of <EM>Menace</EM>

            I don't think there's anything wrong with ethnic
jokes per se. Some of my best jokes are ethnic. Like the one about the
Jewish mother on a beach who screams "My son! My son the neurologist! Is
drowning!" Or the two Scotsmen who tuck $10 bills into their friend's casket
and the third who swaps the bills for a $30 check.

            But what about a sober drama featuring evil
mercantilists whose technologically advanced robots enslave a peace-loving
nation and all at the bidding of a man known as "Emperor"? Oh, right, the
mercantilists also have slanty eyes, wear long robes, and talk just like
Charlie Chan. They attempt to hide their crafty schemes from the outside world
by forcing the conquered nation to sign a faux treaty. They are ruthless and
cruel in their occupation.

            When Michael Crichton wrote a Japan-bashing film
(and novel) back in 1993 called Rising Sun , critics roasted him for
exploiting racial fears. But the racial stereotyping in George Lucas' latest
Star Wars epic, The Phantom Menace , is far worse, and nobody
seems to care.

            Crafty Japanese trade
villains aren't the only heavy-handed ethnic stereotype in The Phantom
Menace . As the story continues, the heroes slip past the evil Japanese to a
nearby planet. There, they attempt to repair their broken spaceship but are
stymied by the hook-nosed owner of the local parts shop--Watto--who also
happens to have a thick Yiddish accent! (To hear an example, click ".")
Psychological manipulations that work on almost everyone fail with Watto--"Mind
ticks don'ta work on me ... only money! ," he cries--and the heroes get what
they want only through the bravery of a gifted slave boy (Anakin Skywalker). At
the end of the desert planet sequence, Anakin is emancipated but separated from
his mother, who still belongs to Watto. Even in a galaxy far away, the Jews are
apparently behind the slave trade.

            And then there's Jar Jar Binks, the childlike sidekick with
the unmistakably West Indian accent and enormous buttocks. Jar Jar is likable,
easygoing, and dumb as dirt--always being scolded or saved from death by the
Jedi knights. His stupidity and cowardice are running jokes throughout the
film. And his people, the Gungan, are a brave but primitive tribe who throw
spears and rocks at the oncoming army in the climactic battle sequence. Only
Hispanics escape Lucas' caricature, which is actually something of a mixed
blessing since Hispanics often rightly complain that they are ignored in the
national race debate.

            In fairness to George Lucas, he gives Japanese
traits to at least one heroine (Queen Amidala), and there is a black man
(Samuel Jackson) on the august Jedi Council. And true evil in this movie--the
so-called Phantom Menace --resides in a handsome white man (Sen.
Palpatine) and a towheaded tot (Anakin Skywalker/Darth Vader).

            Until this last episode, the Star Wars series
has shown a happy, multiculty universe, in which thousands of sentient species
coexist, more or less peacefully. This hardly gives Lucas license to revive
racist stereotypes. But it makes the latest characters seem like a lapse in
taste rather than morals. What's especially puzzling, though, is that film
reviewers have by and large given Lucas a free pass. A smattering of reviewers
griped about Jar Jar Binks, and the Village Voice was offended by the
"blatant ethnic stereotype" behind Watto, "the hook-nosed merchant insect." But
far more typical was the Time reviewer, Richard Corliss, who gushed:
"the junk dealer Watto is a little masterpiece of design: cinnamon stubble on
his corrugated face, chipped rocks for teeth, the raspy voice of Brando's
Godfather speaking Turkish." Turkish? Even without the visual clue of
the hooked nose, Watto's accent is clearly Yiddish, not Turkish. Or click "";
listen again; and you tell me: Is Corliss crazy or am I?

         
      
   
