
   
   
      
         
            Free Movies in Belgrade

            Some European papers seem
to be trying to will Bill Clinton into sending ground troops to Kosovo. The
Daily
Telegraph of London, very keen on ground troops itself, led its front
page Monday with the headline "Clinton hints at Kosovo invasion," based on the
president having dispatched his leading advisers to Sunday morning TV shows "to
suggest a possible escalation of the conflict." El Mundo of Madrid
led Monday with news of the growing American popular support for a land
invasion and the increasing pressure on Clinton to embark on one by both
Republicans and Democrats in Congress.

            The war continued to
lead practically every European paper Monday with the exception of Rupert
Murdoch's mass-circulation British tabloid, the Sun , which splashed
"Wills In Hospital Drama" on its front page. The story told how Prince William,
Prince Charles' eldest son, had had a broken finger reset after a first attempt
to fix it failed. The Daily Telegraph also considered this story worthy
of its front page, although the Times gave greater prominence to a story about the queen's sister: "Prince Margaret recovers after
scalding feet in bath." The paper's medical correspondent explained that "any
serious burn to the feet, hands, face or genitalia is considered of great
medical importance and is usually treated in hospital."

            The Sunday Telegraph of London reported from Belgrade that NATO
has warned Yugoslav authorities about some of its planned airstrikes in order
to minimize civilian casualties. John Simpson, diplomatic editor of the BBC,
wrote for the paper from the Yugoslav capital that the clearest example of this
development had been in the town of Kragujevac, where workers at a car factory
had been ordered to end a sit-in protest against the airstrikes because the
factory was about to be targeted. "The only problem officials faced was in
persuading workers that their information was genuine," he reported. The same
paper reported that 80 British SAS commandos had been sent deep into Kosovo to
target the Serb Special Police and army units for NATO aircraft, find and mark
massacre sites, locate the hideouts of death squad leaders, and find secret
Serb weapons arsenals.

            Another Western
journalist in Belgrade, José Comas of Spain's El Pa í
                  s ,
contributed a special article to the Sunday-Monday edition of Le Monde of Paris describing the
mounting anger and defiance of the Serb population toward NATO: Many young
people, including sworn opponents of Slobodan Milosevic, were saying they would
fight to the death over Kosovo. The people of Belgrade had reconciled
themselves to every shortage except that of cigarettes, he reported, quoting a
young Serb woman as saying that this could be the first thing to destabilize
the Milosevic regime because "the Serbs can't live without tobacco." But Comas
said the war had also brought positive changes to life in Belgrade. "Crime has
completely disappeared," he wrote. "Before the bombs, taxi drivers tried to
cheat their customers. Today, they charge the correct fares." He added that
nearly all theaters had stopped charging for tickets, and that those that still
did charge something were giving the proceeds to the Red Cross.
            

            L e Monde also devoted a front-page article Sunday
to a mysterious journey by Yugoslav Defense Minister Pavle Bulatovic, who,
according to the Bulgarian newspaper Trud , turned up unexpectedly last
Monday at the Serb-Bulgarian border post of Kalotina and was kept waiting there
for several hours before being taken to the airport at Sofia, the Bulgarian
capital. According to Trud , he then took a flight to Athens, but Greek
authorities have since denied his presence there. It was believed he might have
gone arms-shopping in Moscow before reappearing on Serbian TV last Saturday in
Belgrade, Le Monde said.

            In an editorial, Le
Monde described Boris Yeltsin's saber rattling on television last Friday as
"both pathetic and disturbing." The Russians were a great people, it said, and
"to see them represented by a valetudinarian buffoon and exploited by a corrupt
regime after 70 years of totalitarianism fills one with deep sadness." The
paper said that Russia's past greatness and her continuing possession of 5,000
nuclear warheads explains why American, German, and French diplomats continue
to pay court to her, but added: "If it is wise not to marginalize the Russians,
it is also perhaps imprudent to take their bragging seriously, thus encouraging
them to be even more intransigent--and more demanding when they ask for
loans."

            In Madrid, on the other hand, El País said in an
editorial Sunday that the West would be wrong to ignore Yeltsin's warnings,
however "insolent and demagogic" they might be. "Russia is still the world's
second nuclear power, and we cannot further humiliate her with impunity in her
present state of prostration," El País said. "Neither Europe nor the
world should forget the lesson of Versailles: A humiliated Germany hatched the
seeds of Nazism." But "Don't Fear the Bear" was the headline of the
Sunday 
               Telegraph 's editorial.

            The lead story Monday of
the Sydney Morning
Herald had Australia accusing Serbia of forcing an Australian aid
worker, Steve Platt of CARE, into making a "preposterous" televised confession
of spying for NATO. The Australian government accused the Serb authorities of
putting words into Platt's mouth and demanded his immediate release.

             

         
      
   
