
   
   
      
         
            No. 245: &quot;Dis Sent&quot;

            
               Gerald
Vollmer-Heurer has a plan, and Dirk Adol hates it. "It is cheap, it is
degrading, it is smelly," says Mr. Adol, who has a plan of his own. "What I
propose is something clean, useful and solid." What is the subject of Dirk and
Gerald's disagreement?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question
(No. 244)--"When IRS Eyes Are Smiling":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        Fill in the blank on this tax tip from a
Washington state IRS collection officer. "If you don't want to pay your taxes
today all you have to do is say two magic words: _________
_________."
                     
                  
               
            

            "Whale
meat?"-- Michael Fein
            

            
"Willie Nelson."-- Erin H. Murphy , Kate Wing , and Justin
Warner
            

            
"Mommy, please."-- Bill Scheft
            

            "I
commute! (New York Metropolitan-area answer.)"-- Andrew
Silow-Carroll
            

            "I'm
sorry. (No, wait, that's how you get out of accidentally bombing somebody's
embassy.)"-- Zach Hooker
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Tax Reform
Wrap-Up
            

            One criticism of our tax system is its use not
merely to raise revenue but to encourage social policy, as in the deduction for
mortgage interest or charitable contributions. I'd like to suggest that the tax
system should go much, much farther down this road, particularly the sales tax.
Under my plan, sales taxes would only be not eliminated on certain socially
desirable purchases, but also good shoppers would receive an anti-tax, a bonus
for their beneficent purchases.

            For example, in New York City you're charged an 8
1/4 percent tax when you buy a book. I propose that when you buy a really good
book--say, a Patrick O'Brian, he's marvelous!--you'd be paid a 10 percent
bonus: Buy a $20 book; receive $2 from the city.

            Buy a TV set and you should pay a tax: Your
purchase will make you fat and stupid. Buy a TV set that operates only when you
pedal a bicycle-powered generator, and you receive a bonus: Your purchase will
make you thin and stupid.

            Rent a copy of Seven Samurai , a fine movie,
and you get the bonus. Rent Three Ninjas and you pay a tax, but you can
check a box that allocates your money to hire a guy to beat the hell out of
Jack Valenti.

            The question, of course,
is who decides which items are taxed and which earn the buyer a bonus. I do. By
making these decisions a matter of narrow self-interest, my reform remains
within the historical context of the present system, where tax rates are set to
benefit the rich and powerful. My system would differ only in benefiting a
different self. And what's good for me would no doubt be good for the
country.

            
               Bracket Creep
Answer
            

            "If you don't want to pay your taxes today all you
have to do is say two magic words: installment agreement ."

            "You just say you want one and even if the terms
you propose are ridiculous--like $10 a week when you owe tens of
thousands--collection stops while your proposal goes up and down the chain of
managers, until 90 days later you are told no. Then you need to say another
magic word--harassment--and because of this new law, the collection process
stops while your complaint gets reviewed."

            This new law is
Congress' way to bully the IRS into acting nicer. As a result, seizures of
property in lieu of back taxes are down 98 percent this year. Other attempts to
get people to pay what they owe are also way down. Many IRS officials say the
drop stems from their fear of running afoul of the new niceness laws and
getting fired.

            
               Ananda Gupta's
Cool American Bible Follow-Up
            

            There is a board game based on the Battle of
Armageddon.

            Some details:

            

               2 to 3 players.

               Units represent Magog (Russia), the Kings of the East (China), the Western
empires (USA and Europe), Israel, and the Arabs.

               The West gets a piece representing the antichrist.

               When you throw the die to resolve a battle and a 6 comes up, an
"apocalyptic event"--Euphrates dries up, sky turns blood red interfering with
air units, etc.--occurs.

            

            The game is published by
the Microgame
Co-op, a small operation run by a Canadian named Kerry Anderson. Its raison
d'être is to publish board games by unknown designers or on "niche" subjects
(they have a board game depicting the struggle between Peru's government and
the Sendero Luminoso). Check it out.

            
               Headline Haiku
Extra
            

            Sestinas are for sissies. News Quiz participants
are still encouraged to attempt this far more demanding verse form:

            

               Four lines, each with the same number of words; two, three, or four
suggested, but it's poet's choice.

               The words in each line must originally appear adjacent to each other in a
newspaper headline.

               The headlines must all come from a single
edition of a single paper.

            

            Two
lyrical examples:

            Through a Hot
Metaphor
A Series of Missteps
The Boss's Pay Gets
Terms Hard To Swallow

            
               Wall Street Journal , May 18, 1999

            -- Heather
Harmon
            

            Quiet Jubilation
Whitman Mounts
Bloody Gloves
To Sell Drugs

            
               --Winter
Miller
            

             

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            The rich and the dead.

         
      
   
