
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               My husband and I have been together for more
than four years and married for two and a half. He has a child with an
ex-girlfriend. My mother-in-law has told me that the ex confessed to planning
the "accidental" pregnancy because my husband was talking of leaving her, and
she hoped it would keep him around. I was quite disturbed by this, and now more
so since a woman friend of his ex told me she has done the same thing to
another unsuspecting man.
            

            
               I feel that someone
needs to put this woman in her place but don't know if it's any of my business.
I think if I don't ... no one will. (She's a bad person to have mad at you, by
the way.) It just doesn't sit well with me to see another child used in this
way, and another good man being manipulated like this. For some reason I just
can't forget about this. 
               Thanks.
            

            

               --J.T.
            

            Dear J.,

            Prudie understands why this issue presses your
buttons. It is not, however, your job in life to put people in their places.
Another reason for butting out is that you say this latest trapper is a bad
person to have mad at you. People can get knocked down, as well as up, you
know. What I mean is that by confronting this woman with something that is
really none of your business, you run the risk of incurring her enmity and
making yourself a target for social unpleasantness.

            There are times when a
dearly held principle makes interjecting oneself acceptable: when you can
affect the outcome. In this situation, however, the man is already trapped (and
presumably committed to child support) and the woman is not about to undergo an
integrity makeover. Prudie suggests you go to the gym to work off some of this
(understandable) hostility.

            
--Prudie, athletically

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Is it proper to make your bed in a hotel room at
the end of your stay? More to the point, is it considered impolite to not make
the bed?
            

            
               I was brought up to make the bed before leaving,
but my friends say it is just more work for the maid--who has to strip the
sheets anyway.
            

            
               Your
thoughts?
            

            

               --Wondering in Mass.
            

            Dear Won,

            You have slipped a stitch somewhere. Making one's
bed in a hotel is like whipping up your own souffle in a restaurant. Other
people have been employed for just those purposes.

            You perhaps are confusing staying in a hotel with
being a guest in someone's home, where it is good manners to make your bed. The
wild card, however, is when your stay is over. Prudie finds it useful, and
mannerly, to ask the hosts how they wish the bed to be left. Some people want
it stripped, others left as is for their housekeepers to deal with.

            Prudie applauds your
thoughtfulness, however, and is sure you are one of those considerate people
who, when ending a hotel stay, leaves a tip for the maid.

            
--Prudie, tidily

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I have been in a relationship now for about two
years with a most remarkable person. He and I have been going through many
growth and development phases. We have realized that I am somewhat conventional
and that he is non-. The differences in our values are sometimes trivial,
sometimes important. None of the differences, however, interfere with our trust
or love. The differences have to do with issues such as saving/spending money,
independence, and socially expected behavior.
            

            
               How does one know
when you are giving, expecting, or hoping for too much? Is there an answer to
this? Thank you.
            

            

               --Questioning
            

            Dear Quest,

            A lovely Zen quotation comes to mind: There is no
solution, seek it lovingly.

            Using the word
"remarkable" bodes well for your future together, as does your understanding of
your differences. There are no guarantees, of course, about how differences
will play out, so all you can do is try to look ahead and imagine if you both
will adopt the other's ways, carry on comfortably with distinct approaches, or
wind up killing each other.

            
--Prudie, philosophically

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               How should young children address adults? My
wife and I believe that Mr. or Mrs. or Ms. are in order. For very close
friends, perhaps "Aunt" or "Uncle." Most of our (yuppie) friends have their
kids call my wife and me by our first names. Not a big deal, but we think this
is a bad example for our children. What do you say?
            

            
               Sincerely,
            

            

               --E. in Toronto
            

            Dear E.,

            As a rule, children should address adults in the
manner in which the adults ask to be addressed or, alternatively, in the way in
which their own parents instruct them. The real example for the children ought
to be what is comfortable and polite. With luck, they are the same thing. It
sounds to Prudie as though you and your spouse are a little more formal than
the times. Perhaps you might take a social inventory of who is calling whom
what in your circle and then make a standard ruling for your children. If,
however, you are seriously unhappy with youngsters calling their elders by
first names, no one could take affront with the "Aunt" or "Mrs." form of
address. It might make your children stand out, however.

            As you said, not a big
deal.

            --Prudie,
conversationally

         
      
   
