
   
   
      
         
            No. 232: &quot;Summoning DiMaggio's Ghost?&quot;

            

               The list includes whistling, making certain hand gestures, and carrying
bottles, baseball bats, or flashlights. List of what?
            

             

             

            by noon
ET Wednesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Monday's Question
(No. 231)-- "Ultracolossal":
            

            

               An announcement Sunday roiled the world of the superjumbo. Who plans to
do what?
            

            "In a
concession to economy, Long Dong Silver is downsizing, but he promises to
continue his fine work under the name Medium Dong Silver."-- Larry Amaros
(Gary Steinkohl had a similar answer.)

            "Air
France plans to reclassify children under 9 as carry-on luggage. They must be
stowed in overhead storage compartments or slipped neatly under the
seat."-- Stanley Marcus
            

            
"7-Eleven plans to recall 2 million cups designed to hold its newest
extra-extra-large soda, 'The Big-Ass Gulp,' after it was discovered that a
printing error had placed the hyphen between 'Ass' and 'Gulp' "-- Tim
Carvell
            

            "Gloria
Steinem announced that in the new incarnation of Ms. , fat is no longer a
feminist issue. 'No wonder we couldn't sell magazines,' Steinem said. 'This
time around, it's all about thin thighs and firm butts.' "-- Daniel
Radosh
            

            
"Superjumbo? Superjumbo? Well, I'm sure as hell not buying Jumbo
anymore!!"-- Dale Shuger
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Fat
Wrap-Up
            

            Posing this question meant risking fat jokes, but
mercifully most of you steered clear. The fat joke assumes that the body is a
physical manifestation of the mind, an outward sign of inward gracelessness. It
assumes that weight is volitional, that the fat person chooses to be fat--i.e.,
lazy, greedy, undisciplined, self-indulgent--and thus ought to be mocked. Not
so, of course. Like most things about the human body, genetics play all too
indomitable a part. Unless the human is Pamela Anderson. She's still classified
as human, right? After the surgery and all?

            Much is made of the
modern focus on weight, but it's an old form of unkindness. In George Orwell's
1938 novel Coming up for Air , the protagonist muses on how years of such
mockery transform a man:

            
               I've been both fat and thin in my life, and
I know the difference fatness makes to our outlook. It kind of prevents you
from taking things too hard. I doubt whether a man who's never been anything
but fat, a man who's been called Fatty ever since he could walk, even knows of
the existence of any really deep emotions. How could he? He's got no experience
of such things. He can't ever be present at a tragic scene, because a scene
where there's a fat man present isn't tragic, it's comic. Just imagine a fat
Hamlet, for instance! Or Oliver Hardy acting Romeo.
            

            This was, of course, not
meant to be good news. But what is?

            
               Massive Capacity
for Everything Except Pleasure Answer
            

            Boeing may develop an 800-passenger airplane.

            Fending off rival Airbus Industrie, the Seattle
company will invest $3 billion either to build a 550-seat version of its 747 or
to start from scratch on something even bigger and more uncomfortable. Current
versions of the 747 seat between 272 and 386 passengers, depending on
configuration and how much the pilot is distracted by pathetic whimpering akin
to that of caged animals.

            In a countermove, Airbus today announced plans to
build the A318, a 107-seat passenger jet that will pose a challenge to Boeing's
737, a still-popular commuter plane derived from 1960's technology.

            And in a countermove to superjumbo fat jokes, the
Food and Drug Administration has approved Hoffman-LaRoche's orlistat, the first
in a new class of anti-obesity drugs that block the body's absorption of
dietary fat.

            
               Errata
            

            Due to an editing error,
yesterday's Afternoon Delivery ran the wrong quiz question. Sorry. Those
interested can write in for the editor's name and a detailed map to her house.
That Global Positioning Thingy--it's a marvel!

            
               Roiled Riled
Retort
            

            What? It's a perfectly
fine word! What's the problem?

            
               Common
Denominators
            

            1) Fat people, 2) fast-food portion control, 3)
penis size, and 4) breast size.

         
      
   
