
   
   
      
         
            Ethnicity Slickers

            
               But They're
Harmless Stereotypes
            

            In "The Merchant of Menace ," Bruce
Gottlieb for using racial stereotyping in the new Star Wars movie. While
it's undeniably true that Jar Jar Binks is reminiscent of Stepin Fetchit, and
those two noseless Federation guys are sinister Asians of the type not seen
since World War II movies, I take issue with the implication that this is
harmful.

            Let's face it--these stereotypes have been out of
circulation for 30 or 40 years, kept alive almost exclusively by crackpot
racists and horrified anti-stereotype brigades, mostly the latter. Your typical
5-year-old does not associate those traits with those ethnic groups. Lucas
stigmatizes no one but computer-generated alien creatures with these
portrayals--in fact, a black man is prominent on the Jedi counsel. There is a
distinct Asian influence in the court of the queen of Naboo. As Gottlieb points
out, the ultimate villain of the story is an influential, rich, white guy.

            Lucas has been
appropriating elements from other movies his entire career. It only makes sense
that he would revive these long-unused stereotypes and squeeze them for their
entertainment value. I salute him for finding ways to do it without hurting
real people.

            

               --Daniel Krause Canoga Park, Calif.

            
               
                  Bruce Gottlieb
replies:
                
               The response to my recent article "The Merchant
of Menace " has been overwhelming--3,000 e-mails and counting. In that
article I argued that The Phantom Menace revives long-standing racial
stereotypes about Asians, Jews, and blacks. Many of the 3,000 e-mails told me
that I was wrong to make this claim. A smaller number told me that I was right.
Other than what I wrote in the initial article, I have nothing to add to this
debate.
            

            
               But a number of respondents, such as Daniel
Krause, concede that Lucas did indeed revive racial stereotypes but think this
revival is no big deal. Krause says that in this modern age stereotypes no
longer have the power to do harm. A surprisingly large number of respondents
add that only intentional racial stereotypes are harmful (and, as I say in the
original article, I don't think Lucas intended to offend anyone).
            

            
               Frankly, I had not anticipated this type of
argument. I'd always assumed that the revival of certain racial stereotypes in
a children's movie would be universally deplored. But apparently not everyone
feels this way.
            

            
               So, why is it wrong to milk ancient stereotypes
for modern-day laughs? Mostly, it is tasteless, since the racial stereotypes at
issue have been used to justify all sorts of historical barbarities.
Admittedly, there is no bright line dividing an ethnic joke that seems funny
from one that is vicious. The ingredients of humor are hard to pin down. But
reviving Shylock--without a trace of historical awareness--to amuse
uncomprehending children seems obviously vicious rather than funny. At least to
me. One thing is sure--it certainly is not imaginative.
            

            
               And there is yet
another valid concern: that the widespread transmission of racial stereotypes
might indeed be helpful to hate groups. The influence is sure to be diffuse.
Many claims about the influence of popular culture are exaggerated. But it's
hard to believe that people are not affected by the images and stereotypes they
encounter as children. I am not completely confident that racial stereotyping
in movies has a significant effect on racial politics. But neither am I
confident that it doesn't.
            

            
               Naboo Tea
Party
            

            I liked James Surowiecki's in the imaginary
universe of The Phantom Menace ("Moneybox"). But his attempt to
characterize the editorial board of the Wall Street Journal as
ridiculously hostile to taxation forgets that the Journal people are in
good company. Have you forgotten U.S. history? By making a tax dispute the
putative reason for invading a planet, Lucas merely transposed historical
events that Americans ought to be familiar with. Beyond substituting spacecraft
for sailing ships, it wasn't much of a reach. Does "Boston Tea Party" ring any
bells? How about "Lexington and Concord" or "no taxation without
representation"?

            Moviegoers are told very
little about why Naboo was invaded, but the few facts we get are credible,
albeit too sparse to test with the criteria for just wars.

            

               --Patrick O'Hannigan San Luis Obispo, Calif.

            
               Let's Go to the
Tape
            

            David Plotz needs to hit the replay button on the
Prepare To Win tapes (""). As obvious and as simplistic as he deemed the
content, he still managed to miss the point.

            We want to encourage more women and minorities to
run for office. Frequently, candidates announce before they have given real
consideration to the basics: Why am I running? Where will I get the money? How
do I get started? "Thunderingly obvious" to Plotz on his perch it may be, but
to candidates who rush to announce before thoughtful consideration, the result
is a no win .
            

            He takes on Sen. Kit Bond for advising listeners
and potential candidates to "be true to yourself." This advice is easier said
than done, and Bond cautions the candidate that once you sell your vote, you
sell your integrity. Plotz finds this advice cynical and shabby. In this case,
the eye of the beholder is less than 20-20.

            Cynical and shabby is
alive and well in the White House, and that is just one of the reasons it is
necessary to caution potential candidates--on the obvious--that selling your
vote or the Lincoln bedroom is a formula for "prepare to lose."

            

               --Patricia Harrison Co-chair, Republican National Committee
Washington

            
               TV's Golden
'90s
            

            I suppose it figures that you would pick two sitcom
writers to debate the value of writing for television and movies (""). What
either of them has to say is irrelevant: Half-hour comedy writers write jokes,
not shows. One exception, which they both ridiculed, is, in my opinion,
Sports Night .

            As far as screenwriters go, it is hard to remember
a movie in the last few years that is as well written as the prime-time dramas
we have seen in the past 15 years. I am referring to Hill Street Blues ,
L.A. Law , Murder One , Picket Fences , Chicago Hope
(the Kelly years), Law & Order , Homicide: Life on the Street ,
Brooklyn South , The Practice , and yes, even Ally McBeal .
Show me any half-hour show that approaches the wit, intelligence, character,
relevance, and drama of the shows I mentioned.

            We are experiencing right now a golden age of drama
on television, not in the theater, not in movies, but (mainly) in the 10
o'clock-to-11 o'clock hour almost every night. Look at these scripts then go
back and look at what was called "the golden age of television" in the '50s.
Sadly, most of it doesn't hold up compared to what we see now.

            There are some fine
writers out here, and they are writing drama, not jokes.

            
               --Robert
Duncan Sherman Oaks, Calif.

         
      
   
