
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist
               
               , March 13
            

            
               (posted Saturday,
March 13, 1999)
            

            The cover story foretells the possible demise of the
"Euro-American partnership that repeatedly saved the 20 th century
from disaster." Europe calls American political and economic power overbearing,
and the United States is wearying of its protector role. Even so, the two will
probably ally themselves against brewing trouble in China, Russia, and the
Islamic states. ... The secretary-general of NATO defends the alliance's policies against charges of
incoherence. In order to preserve post-Cold War relevance, the alliance needs
1) tight European-American cooperation; 2) beefed-up European responsibility
for security; and 3) continued expansion of membership to Eastern European
nations. ... The magazine calls Libya's expected settlement in the
Lockerbie bombing case a triumph of diplomacy. After being lobbied by the likes
of Nelson Mandela and Kofi Annan, Muammar Qaddafi may finally concede to the
extradition and trial of two terrorists. In exchange, the West would lift its
sanctions against Libya.

            
               
                  New
Republic
               
               , March 29
            

            
               (posted Friday, March
12, 1999)
            

            A cover package on
science and race. One cover story applauds the long-term investments that some
Silicon Valley companies and historically black colleges are making in training
minority students for high-tech jobs. The programs, which start early and
feature intensive mentoring and peer support, are a limited but meaningful step
in reversing black underrepresentation in high-tech industries. ... The
other, more alarmist, cover piece decries the underrepresentation of young,
U.S.-born scientists in American graduate school labs. Foreign degree
candidates don't speak English well enough to teach effectively, edge their
American peers out of the field, and may eventually return to their native
lands, brain-draining American research. ... The "TRB" column says
George Stephanopoulos is feigning innocence and false injury in his new book.
The columnist has not actually read the book. He does, however, criticize
Stephanopoulos' 1982 college graduation speech.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine
               
               , March 14
            

            
               (posted Thursday,
March 11, 1999)
            

            The cover story calls
Amazon.com a carefully crafted mirage. Founder Jeff Bezos has promised
investors and employees a retail revolution, but Amazon's stock price and lofty
ideals may be deflated by competition, overvaluation, and all the old-economy
difficulties of the retail trade. ... The magazine profiles Zinedine
Zidane, French soccer star, son of Algerian immigrants, and symbol-elect of a
newly heterogeneous France. Zidane's "cooler," "more modern," and "more
inventive" style of play is supposed to be a metaphor for France's blossoming
multiculturalism, but he is reluctant to be a French hero, and French racism
runs very deep. ... A long piece chronicles the harrowing experience of
a family who unknowingly adopted a schizophrenic son. The son struggled to find
his birth mother's medical history, which had been withheld by the adoption
agency, and committed suicide when he learned of her terrible mental illness. A
generation ago, adoption agencies considered mental illness to be strictly a
product of poor upbringing, and too private and unpleasant to disclose to
prospective parents.

            

               
                  Time
                
               and Newsweek , March 15
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, March
9, 1999)
            

            The covers of Time and Newsweek
feature tell-alls by Clinton insiders about their bruising stints in the White
House. Newsweek 
               excerpts George Stephanopoulos' new book, which repeats the
standard criticism of the president ("a complicated man responding to the
pressures and pleasures of public life in ways I found both awesome and
appalling"). Stephanopoulos is kinder to the first lady, whom he depicts as
passionate and strong. Among the juiciest scenes: Mario Cuomo refusing a
Supreme Court seat 15 minutes before Clinton officially offered it to him and
National Security Adviser Tony Lake teaching the president how to salute
properly.

            
               Time 's White House insider: Monica
Lewinsky. There is a soft-focus Monica on the cover, and there are softball questions inside ("You signed your first book yesterday.
What was that like?" "Is it easier to be anonymous in New York City than in Los
Angeles?"). When asked if she believes Juanita Broaddrick's allegations,
Lewinsky opines that it was a mutually consensual but "unpleasant" encounter
for Broaddrick: "Twenty years ago, women were not apt to say no." A sidebar says Monica combed Gennifer Flowers' autobiography
for tips on how to seduce the president.

            Speaking of White House
advisers, Time excerpts Henry Kissinger's account of his years as Nixon's secretary of state. Without
even a passing reference to the current president, Kissinger calls his former
boss "politically astute yet prone to self-destructive acts; deeply patriotic
yet wont to hazard his achievements on tawdry practices." Nixon's reputation
for double-dealing came from his fear of confrontation, and Watergate stemmed
from his tendency to give wildly impractical orders that he never really wanted
implemented.

            
               
                  U.S. News
& World Report
               
               , March 15
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, March
9, 1999)
            

            
               U.S. News '
cover analyzes the ever-accelerating presidential candidacy of George W. Bush.
Time and Newsweek run Bush stories, too. All three have the same
take: Bush's greatest liability as a candidate is his air of inevitability,
which exposes him to an upset in the primaries. When asked to comment on
Elizabeth Dole, Bush tells 
               U.S. News , "I think Bob Dole is really one of
the really good men." U.S. News also surveys the rest of the Republican
field, calling Dole "a superachiever ... who battled sexism ... and lived
out feminist ideals perhaps even more consistently than women who wear feminism
on their sleeves like, say, Hillary Rodham Clinton."

            
               
                  The New
Yorker
               
               , March 15
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, March
9, 1999)
            

            A reverent profile of
John le Carré defends him from the lowly designation of "spy novelist" and
bemoans his under-recognition in literary circles. ... A piece describes
how Eric Rudolph, the fugitive accused of bombing the Atlanta Olympics and
several abortion clinics, has become a folk hero in the rural North Carolina
mountains where he is being sought. Fundamentalist locals identify with and may
even be protecting Rudolph because they view his pursuit as part of a
government conspiracy to oppress them. ... An article recounts the
murder of a Guatemalan bishop and human rights activist, committed just after
the publication of his damning report on the army's record of political
killings. In a campaign to discredit church-led human rights investigations,
government and army authorities spun the murder as a homosexual crime of
passion, resulting in the arrest and (finally abandoned) prosecution of one of
the bishop's colleagues.

            
               
                  Weekly
Standard
                
               , March 15
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, March
9, 1999)
            

            For the second week in a
row, the lead
editorial calls for an investigation of and attention to the Juanita
Broaddrick story. ... A conservative pundit argues that feminism is dead
and that the president is to blame. He has dealt a mortal blow to the women's
movement by forcing Democratic and feminist leaders to ignore his commission of
sexual harassment and rape. ... The magazine profiles California
congressman and former House Manager James Rogan, a possible contender for Sen.
Diane Feinstein's seat in 2000 and the savior-elect of California's Republican
Party.

         
      
   
