
   
   
      
         
            Who's Worse, China or Russia?

            

               
                  Economist , May 15
            

            The
editors find
a silver lining in Chinese outrage over the bombing of its Belgrade embassy:
The famously withdrawn country may finally expand its role in world affairs.
... The magazine defends
day traders. The onliners have helped the market by driving down commissions
and encouraging efficient pricing. ... A column
feasts on Larry Summers' ill-suitedness for the politicking-heavy job of
treasury secretary ("Imagine the effort required for this man to feign interest
in the idiotic ramblings of some member of Congress, next to whom the stupidest
graduate student Mr. Summers ever met was John Maynard Keynes.").

            
               
                  New
Republic
               
               , May 31
            

            The
cover story argues that NATO has been more a relief organization than a
military force in the Kosovo crisis, sheltering and protecting the displaced as
the U.N. relief operation became mired in bureaucracy. "NATO is not in the
business of meals on wheels; it should be in the business of guns and
missiles," an American soldier sighs. ... An editorial argues that the embassy riots in Beijing are a
warning that the United States should stop underestimating anti-American
sentiment in China. ... A piece explains the drubbing Gen. Wesley Clark has received from
fellow military leaders. Clark's peers are suspicious of his pedigreed
background and political connections; worse, NATO's half-hearted military
strategy smells to them of another Vietnam. ... A delightful essay slams Germaine Greer's new book as "a sour and
undiscriminating litany of charges against men."

            
               
                  New York
Times 
                  Magazine , May 16
            

            The
second installment of the magazine's year 2000 series is devoted to women, "the
shadow story of the millennium." (Click if you missed the first installment.)
... A brief history rates monogamous marriage, education, employment,
and improved health among the major developments in the lives of females over
the last thousand years. An accompanying time line illustrates women's
progress, beginning with a 12 th -century German nun and ending with
Purdue University's 1999 women's basketball team. ... A piece reports
that Japanese scientists are close to creating the first artificial womb.
Drawback: American researchers suspect that fetuses perceive their mothers'
emotions in utero. ... An article surveys changing attitudes toward
female sexual pleasure, from St. Thomas Aquinas' 13 th -century
allegation that "woman is defective and misbegotten" to a 1995 study suggesting
that orgasms may be linked to fertility. ... The magazine's food
columnist gushes over Martha Stewart, calling her "America's superego."

            
               
                  Time and
Newsweek , May 17
            

            
               Newsweek blasts the hype surrounding Star Wars: The Phantom Menace
(its star turns in major magazines were "carefully engineered" by Lucas) but
splashes the film on its cover anyway. Inside, a critic brands the film "a big disappointment." Carrie Fisher, a k a
Princess Leia, dryly reminisces about her metal bikini and crush on Harrison Ford
during the filming of the original trilogy but says she can't even remember
what the third installment was called. Time applauds the film's splashy
special effects but deems it short on "human magic" (for more early returns, check

                  Slate
               's own "").

            
               Time 's cover profile of Madeleine Albright defends her Kosovo policy
from charges of poor planning and incoherence, and tallies her successes
instead: She consolidated European support for airstrikes at Rambouillet, has
deftly cultivated consensus among NATO's member countries, and is drafting a
"mini-Marshall Plan" to restore stability to the Balkans. ... The
magazine tracks how Albanians around the world are funneling money to the
Kosovo Liberation Army. Émigrés write checks to organized fund-raising
networks, which then smuggle cash and weapons over remote Albanian roads into
Kosovo.

            
               Newsweek
wonders how George W. Bush will survive the transition from
honeymoon to full-fledged campaign. ("If Bush were a movie, he'd be the new
Star Wars : the closely guarded, breathlessly anticipated next episode in
a multigenerational saga of family destiny.") ... 
               Time lauds
Elizabeth Dole's New Hampshire debut, citing her gutsy stances on gun control
and huge potential to win centrist voters. She "is running the campaign she
wanted her husband to run."

            
               
                  U.S. News
& World Report, May 17
            

            The
cover story christens professional wrestling "a new American art
form," albeit a savage one: Fifty episodes of a popular wrestling TV show
included "1,658 instances of grabbing or pointing to one's crotch, 157
instances of an obscene finger gesture, 128 episodes of simulated sexual
activity, and 21 references to urination." The wrestlers also enact
crucifixions, sadomasochism, and prostitution. ... A sidebar speculates that Slobodan Milosevic is probably
hoarding chemical weapons, including nerve gas, blister agents, choking
compounds, and hallucinogens. ... The magazine predicts softer GOP
stances on gun control and abortion. Elizabeth Dole has sounded the cry for
increasing restrictions on guns, and both Dole and George W. Bush have
been "mute" on abortion. (For 
                  Slate
                Editor Michael Kinsley's take
on Dole's and Bush's halfhearted pro-life stances, click .)

            
               
                  The New
Yorker , May 17
            

            A
piece describes how the leading Kosovar Albanian newspaper is currently being
published in exile in Macedonia by a ragtag bunch of twentysomething editors.
The paper, which serves as a lifeline for dispossessed Kosovars, is lukewarm on
the KLA and favors the establishment of an international protectorate.
... A mesmerizing article describes how a cadre of plaintiffs'
attorneys, fresh from recent victories over Big Tobacco, are going after the
gun industry. Amazing detail: The idea of suing gunmakers, one of the lawyers
says, came straight from a Wall Street Journal editorial decrying the
ever-widening scope of tort lawsuits. ... A writer chronicles the
transformation of her baby nephew, born with a severe genetic cranio-facial
disorder. A series of operations has given the baby eyes, fingers, a navel, and
an airway for breathing.

            
               
                  Weekly
Standard , May 17
            

            A
jubilant cover
story congratulates Gov. Jeb Bush for the passage of Florida's--and the
nation's first--statewide voucher system. To avoid charges of being
anti-public-education, Bush cannily referred to the vouchers as "opportunity
scholarships." ... An editorial mocks the overtures white politicians
make to minorities: Republicans are "dorky and patronizing;" Bradley is
"schoolmarmy" and self-righteous; Gore is "cartoonish"; and none is serious
about dismantling the racial and ethnic classifications that still plague
American law. ... A piece recommends that Alan Greenspan be awarded the
Nobel Prize in Economics. "Shouldn't a man who saves the world financial system
rank with one who makes a fundamental discovery in the field?"

            
               
                  The
Nation , May 24
            

            Almost
the entire magazine is devoted to opposing the Kosovo intervention. The
editorial declares that the intervention "has failed catastrophically." The
editors argue that Milosevic's release of the POWs was a "humane gesture that
should be built upon." The allies must stop bombing and let the Russians
negotiate on their behalf. A U.N. force with Russia at its core should police
the peace. ... Tom Hayden calls "Clinton's war" a "Vietnam-style
quagmire" that should be abandoned. ... An article argues that
NATO is "the armed hand of the new capitalist global order." NATO averted its
eyes to Milosevic's atrocities until it was clearly in the strategic interest
of capitalism to intervene.

         
      
   
