
   
   
      
         
             Hold That Martyrdom

            On May 7 the first (and probably last) trial of
Julie Hiatt Steele for lying and obstruction of justice ended with a hung jury.
The low-key coverage of the event reflected several pre-established media
themes: a) Steele is a "peripheral" figure hounded by a vindictive special
prosecutor, Kenneth Starr; b) the Steele trial is a pathetic coda to Flytrap's
now-finished symphony ("Starr's Last Gasps," says Time ); and c) the sole
remaining function of the case is to help determine the credibility of Kathleen
Willey, the Richmond, Va., socialite who accuses President Clinton of crudely
groping her near the Oval Office in 1993.

            All wrong, I'd argue.
What follows is a short primer on the Steele case for those who,
understandably, have been paying more attention to the wars, tornadoes, mass
murders, and nuclear espionage that constitute the rest of the news:

            
               Who is
Steele?
            

            Steele is a former friend of Willey's. The issue is
whether Steele provided the truth to Starr's grand juries about what Willey
told her about Clinton's supposed grope. Steele, it's been alleged, has at
various times offered three different stories:

            Story No. 1: That Willey told Steele of a
presidential pass the very day it occurred, in November 1993--and that
it was a sexual advance that left Willey "humiliated, scared, embarrassed."
Steele told this story to Newsweek 's Michael Isikoff in March 1997
(according to his book Uncovering Clinton ) after Willey had suggested to
Isikoff that he could check out the grope story with Steele.

            Story No. 2: That Willey only told Steele "about
the incident weeks after it happened, saying only that the president had made a
pass at her," not necessarily an unwelcome pass. According to Isikoff, Steele
told this version to him in the summer of 1997, just as he was preparing to
write up the Willey story for Newsweek . Steele at that time said that
Story No. 1 was a lie she had told him at Willey's request. Isikoff reported
both Steele's initial story and Story No. 2 in his first piece on the Willey
episode, published in Newsweek in August 1997. Isikoff has reported that
Steele repeated Story No. 2 to him as recently as early 1998, and at Steele's
trial, two of her friends said she told them something like Story No. 2 before
Isikoff even appeared on the scene.

            Story No. 3: That Willey
"never told [Steele] of any sexual advances made by President Clinton," even
welcome sexual advances, and that the first Steele heard about any such thing
was in 1997 when Willey called her and asked her to lie to Isikoff. Steele took
this position in an affidavit she signed in February 1998, after the Lewinsky
scandal broke. It is the story she told Starr and claims today is the truth.
Steele also denies that in recanting Story No. 1 she confirmed to Isikoff that
Willey had told her about any pass. In effect, Steele says she never
told Story No. 2.

            President Clinton's story, which he repeated under oath to
a grand jury, is that he never made any sort of pass at Willey (i.e., it jibes
with Steele's Story No. 3). Willey, in her Steele trial testimony, stuck to the
story that she told Steele of an unwanted pass the day it happened (Story No.
1), although she said that she only knows she told Steele immediately because
Steele once reminded her of it!

            The prevailing
perception, of course, is that there were only two Steele stories, one
pro-Willey, one anti-Willey. Press accounts--even Isikoff's account in his
book--tend to omit Story No. 2, presumably for simplicity's sake. But Story No.
2 is what makes Starr's prosecution of Steele seem rational.

            
               So why has Starr
pursued Steele?
            

            The basic press take is
that Starr is pursuing Steele to vindicate Willey. That's doubtful. Starr might
like to believe Willey--and Willey's story was bolstered more than undermined
by the testimony at last week's trial. (Click to find out why.) Still, Willey's
story has serious problems, quite apart from Steele, as a recent, endless
analysis in The Nation makes clear. Starr is much more
likely to be interested in Steele herself and in why she changed her story.

            This is where Steele's Story No. 2 becomes important. The
key thing about Story No. 2 is that while it helped clear Clinton of the charge
of making an aggressive, unwanted sexual overture, it still contradicted
the Clinton camp's official line, which was (and is) that there was no
sexual overture at all , not even a welcome one. Story No. 2 was only
semi-exculpatory.

            If Steele really changed
her story a second time, to Story No. 3, that might suggest she was trying to
fall in line with the official White House account, which in turn suggests that
someone from Clinton's side somehow "got" to her. That, at least, is what
Starr's camp seems to believe. Starr's goal--as Bruce Shapiro, in a perceptive
anti-Starr Salon 
               essay , recognizes--is most likely not to vindicate Willey but
to unravel a presidential cover-up conspiracy.

            
How? By convicting Steele of lying and then
getting her to "flip" and finger in the Clinton camp got to her to change her
story to version No. 3. Starr's theory may be a bit florid in its paranoia, but
it's not crazy, given what we already know about current White House
operations. Significantly, the White House could have pressured Steele to
falsely switch to Story No. 3 even if Willey is lying about Clinton's grope,
and even if Willey at some point asked Steele to lie to Isikoff for her.

            
               What makes Starr so
sure Steele lied?
            

            He's got evidence. At the
trial, three friends of Steele's contradicted her account. One said Steele told
him she'd heard Willey's account long before 1997; the other two said she'd
actually told them something like Story No. 2 before 1997. All this is quite
apart from Willey's testimony and Isikoff's reporting.

            
               But Steele's still a
peripheral figure, right?
            

            She is now, but she
wouldn't be if she flipped and finked. Security guard Christoph Meili was an
extremely peripheral figure in the Swiss Holocaust banking scandal until he
blew the whistle on the destruction of bank records. Detective would have been
a peripheral figure in the O.J. Simpson trial if the defense team hadn't made a
big fuss over whether he was or was not telling the truth about his use of a
racial epithet.

             

            Y et Steele had no obvious, sufficient motive for lying
...
            

            Right, but that's the
point. If she did in fact lie, what made her do it? Starr may be wrong in
thinking the reason was intimidation by a Clintonite conspiracy. But there's
only one clear way left for him to try to find out.

            
               At least Steele's a
sympathetic figure?
            

            Steele is a divorced
single mom (and grandmother) who has had to set up a Web site to solicit
money for her "defense fund." On the other hand, her lawyers are representing
her pro bono. And of all the "peripheral" figures in the Lewinsky scandal,
Steele has been among the most industrious at marketing herself. Indeed, Steele
seems to have followed Strout's Law, which summarizes the advice of legendary
journalist Richard Strout to "sell every story three times." Long before she
was threatened with prosecution, Steele sold a photo of Willey to the
National Enquirer for $7,000. (At the same time, she also met with an
Enquirer reporter.) Then she was paid $500 for sitting down with Richard
Gooding of the tabloid Star to see what else she might have to sell.
Then, most surprisingly, after the Lewinsky scandal broke she was paid $5,000
by Time magazine. (Click for more on why Time is .)

             

            B ut didn't Starr threaten to take away Steele's adopted
9-year-old son?
            

            As even Steele-philes
like Jeffrey Rosen of the New Republic acknowledge, Starr was trying to
find out whether someone in Clinton's camp might have somehow threatened
to take away Steele's adopted Romanian son, and thereby gotten her to change
her story. So, Starr asked questions about the legality of the adoption.
Whether in asking these questions Starr himself was pressuring Steele--and
whether that constitutes a "vicious attempt to threaten Steele's adoption"
(Shapiro) in "genuine Gestapo fashion" (Al Hunt in the Wall Street
Journal )--is a question the current criminal proceeding will not
answer.

            
               So 
               w
               as the evidence at trial
enough to prove Steele guilty "beyond a reasonable doubt"?
            

            After reading the
transcript, I'd say probably not. But that's because Starr, mindful of Justice
Department guidelines discouraging compelled testimony from journalists, never
even tried to get the testimony of his best potential witness, . Meanwhile,
Steele could not be called by the prosecution, thanks to the Fifth Amendment,
and did not testify in her own defense. (Her lawyers rested their case without
presenting any evidence of their own.) Only a criminal justice system as
sophisticated as ours could hold Steele's trial without hearing testimony from
the two most important witnesses.

             

            
               In other words, Steele
won and Starr lost?
            

            After the jury deadlocked, Steele proclaimed
victory--and victimhood. ("It's time to start my life again," she said.) But
the Steele jury--unlike the jury in the recent trial of Susan McDougal, with
which Steele's trial is often twinned--did not acquit her of any of the
four charges against her. Jurors didn't say which way they were split and vowed
not to talk to reporters (though it came out that one thought Willey's skirt
was too short). Starr could seek to retry the Steele case. He hasn't announced
whether he will.

            Pssst! If you do, call
Isikoff this time!

            F ull 
               disclosure: I worked for
Newsweek in the second half of 1998 and am still listed on the masthead
as a contributing editor. I'm also friends with Isikoff. Steele is suing
Newsweek and Isikoff, claiming Isikoff broke an "off-the-record"
promise. Isikoff denies making any such promise. I suspect Steele's suit is
groundless, but whether it is or is not, it has had the effect of more or less
silencing Newsweek on the subject of Steele. Starr's prosecutors told
the judge at Steele's trial that one of Steele's former friends was ready to
testify that Steele said "the lawsuit was filed to shut [Isikoff] up." The
judge did not allow the testimony.

         
      
   
