
   
   
      
         
            Unhappy Birthday

            The bombed shell of
Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic's Belgrade residence was the favorite
front-page picture in the European press Friday. "Yesterday the war got
personal," commented the Daily Telegraph of London. "Slobba's Cracking," said the British
tabloid the Sun , claiming that Milosevic made a new peace offer only
because NATO had "blown his bed to bits." The main story in both the
Telegraph and the Times of London was the new hawkishness of British Prime
Minister Tony Blair. His statements in the United States that victory was the
only acceptable "exit strategy" from Yugoslavia are part of a new
Anglo-American deal, the Telegraph claimed. Blair and President Clinton
have "forged a new strategic partnership in which Mr. Blair is the leading hawk
and Mr. Clinton tacitly goes along with deeper involvement in the Balkans. ...
While Mr. Blair tried to stiffen spines among the other 17 Nato leaders
arriving for the Alliance's 50 th birthday, Mr. Clinton made it clear
that the world's sole superpower was underwriting the British-led
escalation."

            The Times '
front-page headline was "Hawk Blair stiffens US resolve." It compared his
behavior in the United States with "Margaret Thatcher's spine-stiffening
American visit before the Gulf War." The liberal Guardian highlighted
Blair's call for a new "doctrine of international community" and his explicit
statement in a speech in Chicago that his "Third Way" thinking offers a
framework for the entire globe. But the paper led on Milosevic's peace offer,
which it said included "a key Yugoslav concession"--agreement to an
international security force in Kosovo.

            In an op-ed article Thursday, Times columnist
Anatole Kaletsky attributed the triumph of the Third Way to the global economic
crisis of the past two years. This, he said, is "one of the luckiest breaks
that Bill Clinton and Tony Blair ever had, even in their amazingly lucky
careers." Kaletsky wrote, "Nobody seems to believe any longer that markets work
best if businesses are simply left to their own devices or that capitalism can
avoid booms and busts without active government intervention. ... In short, the
Third Way faith in 'smart' government seems to have triumphed completely over
the Thatcher-Reagan doctrine that government is the problem and market forces
the solution."

            In an analysis of Blair's
"new internationalism" on its editorial page, Le Monde of Paris described
it Friday as "a kind of humanitarian Wilsonism that wouldn't be limited to the
right of peoples to self-determination that Woodrow Wilson wanted to impose on
the defeated European empires after World War I ; it defends the rights of man,
the rights of minorities, and cultural and religious freedoms." The author
welcomed Europe's attempt in Kosovo to break openly with the spirit of Munich
but warned that the new internationalism contains paradoxes that could spell
trouble in the future. One is its willingness to use NATO, rather than the
United Nations, to enforce the aims of the U.N. Charter; another was
uncertainty about its geographical extension (should its writ run outside
Europe?); another the tendency of American "messianism" to mask egotistic,
nationalist policies; and yet another the clash of different national values
and principles around the world.

            In Germany, the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung led on peace moves under the
headline "Bonn expects much from American-Russian co-operation." While
highlighting Chancellor Gerhard Schröder's three conditions for peace--an
immediate end to the use of force; a withdrawal of Serb military, paramilitary,
and police personnel from Kosovo; and their replacement by international peace
enforcers--it said in an editorial that NATO can only leave Yugoslavia as
"victors." The main Italian papers all led Friday on Milosevic agreeing to a
U.N. presence in Kosovo, while El Mundo of Madrid led with Clinton authorizing preparations
for a land invasion. In a report from New York, La Repubblica of Rome said
it is now clear that the NATO allies are divided into doves and hawks, with
Germany and Italy being the leading doves and Britain the leading hawk.
Corriere della
Sera of Milan carried a front-page report that the southeast Italian
region of Apulia has experienced a 40 percent fall in summer tourist bookings
because of the Kosovo conflict and has appealed to the Italian government to
declare it an economic crisis zone.

            According to the
Daily Telegraph , an interview in the Washington Post with NATO
Secretary-General Javier Solana revealing a dusting down of Kosovo invasion
plans was "arranged" by the White House. In an article on NATO's birthday
celebrations, the Times ' Brussels correspondent recalled how one week
into NATO's air campaign, Solana told visitors not to worry about Kosovo
spoiling the party. "I'm sure the problem will be solved before April 23," he
said then, with a reassuring smile.

            Among several British editorials on NATO's birthday, the
Times ' warned Blair against trying to woo America with "the moral
fervour which comes so naturally to him," since what was most needed to sway
U.S. opinion was "an informed case based on strategic interest, an argument for
committing US troops that explains why the future contours of European peace
are being decided in the Balkans." It warned him, too, not to "jump the gun" on
Clinton and to "avoid the slightest hint that this is a Bill-and-Tony show,
with the rest of Europe hanging on their coat-tails." The paper said, "US
troops in Kosovo are vital, because the key is the decisive thwarting of
Slobodan Milosevic's campaign, as destabilising as it is criminal, against its
people."

            The Guardian , under the headline "Unhappy
Birthday," said the celebrations were taking place "in the wrong place at the
wrong time" because "the war will need to be over--'won' is hardly apt--before
the profoundest question of this anniversary season can be addressed: whether
the North Atlantic Alliance can and should continue into the 21 st
century." The Daily Telegraph , however, extolled NATO as "the only
organisation capable of upholding the international order" and defended its
Yugoslavia offensive as a means of keeping the United States happy. "America,
with its Wilsonian moral impulses, could not be held indefinitely in an
alliance that sat back, fat and happy, while atrocities were being committed on
a large scale in Europe's backyard," it said. "Disgust with European
complacency would have led to fresh calls for withdrawal."

            In the Arab and Islamic
world, newspaper commentators were urging an Islamic contribution to solving
the Kosovo crisis. In al-Ra'i of Jordan Thursday, political analyst Fahd
al-Fanek said Islamic countries should put together a peacekeeping force that
would be acceptable to both the Serbs and the Kosovar Albanians, while Clovis
Maksoud, writing in both al-Khaleej of the United Arab Emirates and the
Pan-Arab al-Hayat , said Arabs should work to take the initiative out of
NATO's hands and restore it to the United Nations, where it belongs. Maksoud, a
former Arab League diplomat now heading the Center for the Global South at the
American University in Washington, noted a "frightening and obscene"
convergence between Serbia's ethnic cleansing and the behavior of NATO, which
has taken international law into its own hands.

             

         
      
   
