
   
   
      
         
            <STRONG><EM>Slate</STRONG></EM>, Version<B><I> </B></I>2.0

            As 
                  Slate
               's design
director--yes, I'm wearing black--I could essay at length about the redesign
that debuts in today's issue. I could speak volumes about our ambition to
balance white space with type, and art with copy. About our quest to create
more readable Web pages. About new navigation that makes dancing through

                  Slate
                to find interesting articles all but
effortless.

            But instead of boring
you with self-serving "designspeak," I've prepared a concise roll call of
what's new and different in the new and different

                  Slate -- our first complete redesign since we launched
in 1996.

            
               
                  What's
New?
               
            

            

               New Content Views
            

            We've
created three new ways to view 
                  Slate
                contents.

            

                "New Today" lists everything posted since 7 p.m. ET the previous day.

               "Complete" lists the entire current content of

                     Slate
                  .

               The "Navigation Banner," that maroon stripe that says
"
                     Slate
                  " at the top and bottom of every

                     Slate
                   page, uses color coding and drop-down menus to
give you access to any page in 
                     Slate
                   from any other
page in 
                     Slate
                  . The only catch is you have to have a
modern browser such as Internet Explorer 4.0 or 5.0 or the forthcoming Netscape
5.0 browser.

            

            I'll tell you more about
how to use the Navigation Banner in just a minute.

            New Today is the default
home page of 
                  Slate
               , which means it's what you'll see
when you go to www.slate.com. If you want
to see a list of the entire current content, just click the Complete button on
the Navigation Banner. If you really prefer this one, we encourage you
to bookmark it (in Netscape Navigator) or put it in your browser's Favorites
folder (in Internet Explorer).

            

               New Sections
            

            We've sorted our content
into four sections: "Briefing," "Features," "24/Seven," and "Utilities."

            

               Briefing

            

            Think of the Briefing
section as your quick hit on the day's and week's news. "Today's Papers,
summarizes the five top U.S. dailies every morning by 7 ET. "International
Papers" does the same for the world press three times a week. "In Other
Magazines" sizes up the Time , Newsweek , and other major
periodicals--usually before they hit your mailbox or local newsstand. We also
chart the critical consensus about books, movies, art, and music in "Summary
Judgment" and spare you from having to watch the Sunday talk shows by offering
you the gist in "Pundit Central" (check in Sunday evening to prepare for Monday
sessions at the water cooler). There's more good stuff in Briefing, including
"Explainer," "The Week/The Spin," and "
                  Slate
               
Favorites" (dozens of useful links to other reportage and commentary--and
gossip--on the Web). We invite you to explore.

            

               Features

            

            Under the Features
rubric, we've grouped our regular articles, news commentary, and arts and
culture features. This is also where you'll find our regular columnists--such
as Paul Krugman on economics, Jacob Weisberg on culture, David Plotz on
politics, David Edelstein on movies, Anne Hollander on fashion, and more.

            

               24/Seven

            

            24/Seven pulls together
the 
                  Slate
                features that are updated repeatedly
throughout the week: Our daily "Diary"; the e-mail give-and-take of "The
Breakfast Table" and "The Book Club" and "Dialogues" about the pressing issues
of the day; e-mail dispatches from hither and yon; as well as our "Moneybox"
meditations on business, "Chatterbox" commentaries on politics, and
"Culturebox" on ... well, you guess. 

            

               Utilities

            

            Think of Utilities as
your 
                  Slate
                toolbox, the place to get

                  Slate
                business done. Go to Utilities to send us an
e-mail, to get e-mail from us, to sound off about an article, to search

                  Slate
               's archives, or to update your member profile
info. (You say you're not a 
                  Slate
                member?! Click
here
to sign up for just $19.95 and enjoy a world of benefits, including e-mail
delivery and access to our archives.) Click on Utilities if you want to print
the entire issue using Microsoft Word, or if you're dying to inspect our
masthead ("Boiler
                  Slate
               ").

             

            
               Navigation,
Navigation, Navigation
            

            I promised to teach you how to use the Navigation
Banner, didn't I? So, here goes. (Remember you must have Internet Explorer 4.0
or better or the forthcoming Netscape Navigator for this function to work.)

            Move your cursor to the Navigation Banner at the top
of this page, and click on the Briefing section head. A "drop down" menu will
appear and reveal the contents of Briefing. Now, move your cursor to the other
section heads. Additional menus listing the contents will drop down. To select
an article in a drop down menu, click on it. Congratulations, you've mastered

                  Slate
                navigation.

            The beauty of the
Navigation Banner is that every page now contains a complete

                  Slate
                table of contents. You don't have to click back
to the big table of contents every time you find more good stuff to read. Of
course, if you fancy the big table of contents, just click New Today, Complete,
or the 
                  Slate
                logo.

             

            
               More Good
Navigation News
            

            Another fabulous thing
about the drop down menus is that they list the headlines of the most recent
postings in multiple-entry departments such as The Breakfast Table, Dialogues,
Diary, and Explainer.

            
               Even More Good
Navigation News--"Today in Slate"
            

            Running down the left side of every article you'll
find "Today in 
                  Slate
               ," which is our attempt to
persuade you to check out other good stuff currently on our site. These would
be on any topic. By contrast "Related in 
                  Slate
               " box
contains links to relevant 
                  Slate
                pieces--new or
old--that are related to the page you are currently reading. We'll also
continue to list links to the best Internet sites and to pertinent articles in
the "Related on the Web" box. Look for both boxes at the bottom of most
stories.

            Have I left anything
out? I think not. But we're eager to hear what you think about our new look and
feel. Please address your comments to letters@slate.com. We look forward to hearing
from you.

         
      
   
