
   
   
      
         
            Monica to Emigrate?

            The NATO war against
Yugoslavia ceased to lead the front pages of many European newspapers for the
first time Monday. The British tabloids were more interested in a mysterious
bomb--definitely not Irish, said the police hastily--that injured dozens of
shoppers in Brixton, South London, Saturday. The Italian press was more
interested in the political machinations that led to the cancellation of a
planned referendum on electoral reform. The French press was more interested in
a crisis within an alliance of French opposition parties, and the Spanish press
with Spain's own internal politics.

            Only the British and
German broadsheets stuck loyally with the nightmare in the Balkans, but the
angles were all different. The Guardian of London, apparently taking its cue from the
New York Times , led Monday with a claim that President Clinton had been
misled by intelligence reports that President Milosevic "would buckle at the
first show of high-tech military might." The paper said that "leaked documents"
included a CIA assessment from January claiming that Milosevic has no stomach
for a war he could not win. "After enough of a defense to sustain his honor and
assuage his backers, he will quickly sue for peace," the CIA report was quoted
as saying.

            The Daily Telegraph led with a startling eight-column headline
"Milosevic must go, says Blair." The removal of Milosevic has not so far been
an official NATO war aim, but the paper claimed that the British prime minister
and Clinton have "changed tack." The basis for this assertion appeared a little
weak. It was that Blair, speaking Sunday on American TV, said Milosevic was "a
significant problem" and that it is "extremely difficult to contemplate"
Kosovar Albanians living in future under his rule. The Times of London led,
rather surprisingly, with the ecological fallout from NATO's bombing of a
Serbian oil refinery. "Poison cloud engulfs Belgrade," said the paper's main
front-page headline over a warning of "an ecological disaster." The Daily
Telegraph ran the same story on an inside page, saying that Strauss'
"Beautiful Blue Danube" has gone black.

            Germany's Die Welt led Monday with a
prediction of a new wave of Serb brutality against Albanian Kosovars. Under
this was a photograph of Berlin's historic parliament building, the Reichstag,
which reopened Monday 66 years after the notorious fire that tightened Hitler's
grip on power. But the joyous reopening was marred by an acrimonious row over
its redesign by the British architect Norman Foster. Stern magazine
complained that "Foster's airport aesthetic with neon lights and metallic gray"
dominates the building's new interior, while Die Welt Sunday attacked
its "banality" and its "chilly, almost antiseptic" atmosphere.

            The Financial Times of London said Monday that Albania was trying
to get diplomatic advantage from its acceptance of more than 320,000 Kosovar
refugees by demanding quick entry into the European Union, overriding the usual
criteria for membership. The Daily Telegraph dwelt on the Pentagon's
anger with NATO headquarters in Brussels for providing false evidence to the
world's media on the bombing of the refugee convoy in Kosovo. In Monday's
National Post of Canada, historian Michael Bliss of the University of
Toronto wrote a searing condemnation of the Kosovo war, predicting among other
things that the Americans would never again agree to lead future wars by
committee. "The country that does most of the fighting and pays most of the
bills will from now on call the tune, looking to its own interests," he said.
"Whether the United States will have a taste for the long haul in the Balkans,
or will withdraw from Europe to protect its clearer national interests, hangs
in the balance."

            A Londoner named Slobodan Milosevic has protested
to the British Press Complaints Commission about media persecution, according
to the Daily Telegraph Saturday. In a formal complaint to the newspaper
industry's self-regulatory body, Milosevic (who has lived in Britain for 19
years and calls himself Dan) listed at least a dozen news organizations that
have been camping on his doorstep or otherwise pestering him, his family, and
his east London neighbors since the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia began. He told
the PCC that he wishes to "state categorically" that he is not related to the
president of Yugoslavia, has no links with any of the former Yugoslav
republics, and does not want to discuss his views on the Balkans with anyone.
The PCC said it would investigate.

            The Times of
London announced on its front page Saturday that Monica Lewinsky is planning to
move to Britain. Quoting "her friend and confidant" Sir Ian McKellen, the
Oscar-nominated actor, the paper said she was going to live there because the
press and public are more sympathetic toward her in Britain. "She has
complained about constant harassment from the American press which
characterises her as an overweight sex-crazed seductress," the Times
explained.

             

         
      
   
