
   
   
      
         
            Blundering Blurbers

            
               Duked
Out
Citing long-standing unresolved ethics and safety violations, federal
authorities suspended human experimentation at the Duke University Medical Center
for four days in May. The experiments ranged from drug tests to research on
psychological reactions to illness. Among the alleged violations: "insufficient
training" of review board members, "potential financial conflicts of interest
with some board members," and inadequate supervision of informed-consent
procedures. (Federal investigators also uncovered an incident in which a
space-walk experiment volunteer briefly lost consciousness.) The ban was lifted
after Duke agreed to overhaul its procedures for protecting human subjects. The
government also warned the City
University of New York and the Mount Sinai School of Medicine to clean up their safety
procedures or face shutdowns of their federally financed human research.

            
               Legal
Omertà
               
            

            

               Closed Chambers , Edward Lazarus' behind-the-scenes exposé of political
wrangling at the Supreme Court, continues to generate controversy. Lazarus, who clerked for Justice Harry Blackmun, earned the
opprobrium of legal scholars, other clerks, and the justices for making
internal court business public in his book, published last year. Now Anthony
Kronman, the dean of Yale Law School who blurbed the hardcover edition of the
book as "well-researched and wonderfully written," has formally apologized to
the Supreme Court and sent a letter of explanation to Yale Law School alumni.
Declaring that his initial enthusiasm for the book constituted a "real lapse"
in judgment, Kronman said he believes former clerks are bound to silence about
the court's nonpublic discussions and activities. According to USA
Today , Kronman's blurb will not appear on the paperback edition of the book
due out this month.

            
               Little Big
Man
            

            

               New York
Review of Books writer Thomas Powers stands accused of ignorance,
incompetence, and racial stereotyping by 32 Native American studies scholars
for his review of several books about Native Americans. Powers, a
journalist who has written about spycraft and the atomic bomb, drew the ire of
the scholars, led by Patricia Hilden of the University of California at
Berkeley and Arnold Krupat of Sarah Lawrence College, who wrote that he had
"little or no detailed knowledge of Native American scholarship" and that he
reproduced tired clichés about Native American figures and traditions. "We are
quite certain that no one of us would be asked to review books in Mr. Powers's
fields," the signatories declared in a letter in the May 20 issue. Powers
expressed bafflement at the charges, concluding that the letter "amounts to an
attempt to intimidate ... me from writing about 'their field.' " The
Review 's editors concurred: "It is hard to take seriously academics who
condemn an independent scholar without making a single substantive criticism of
his work."

            
               The Academics
Strike Back
            

            

               Star Wars hoopla visits academia, reports the Dallas Morning
News . Some scholars view the original Star Wars film as a simplistic
Cold War allegory that helped to legitimize Ronald Reagan's view of the Soviet
Union as an "evil empire" and to build popular support for a "star wars"
missile defense. Others reverse the movie's ideological lenses, arguing that
filmmaker George Lucas based his "evil emperor" on Richard Nixon and Darth
Vader on Henry Kissinger. Finally, others charge that Star Wars
represents a covert remake of Birth of the Nation . "The narrative
homologies between Birth of a Nation and Star Wars click beyond
the possibility of accident," writes Clyde Taylor of Tufts University. "Darth
Vader (dark invader?) is the upstart commander of 'black' political forces,
threatening a weakened, but spiritual, refined, and honor-bound version of the
'South.' ... [R2-D2 and C-3PO] take the place of those sassy, back-talking
darky house servants, of equally mechanical loyalty to their betters." Whatever
their differences, the scholars agree on Star Wars ' enduring impact on
American culture.

            
               Eyes on the
Prize
            

            The
Bancroft Prize, given to honor the best works of American
history, was awarded this year to two books on slavery and one on the (hostile)
relations between Native Americans and settlers. The books are Many
Thousands Gone: The First Two Centuries of Slavery in North America, by the
University of Maryland's Ira Berlin; Slave Counterpoint: Black Culture in
the Eighteenth-Century Chesapeake & Lowcountry, by William and Mary's
Philip D. Morgan; and The Name of War: King Philip's War and the Origins of
American Identity , by Boston University's Jill Lepore.

            
               The Other Side of
the Rainbow
            

            
Affirmative action is good for you, supporters told the New York Times .
The University of
Michigan, for one, cites statistical evidence to argue that affirmative
action benefits not only minority students but all students. White students who
attend a "diverse" college campus are more likely to work in integrated
settings and to display ambition, confidence, and other worthy traits, the
school attests. "Diversity enhances learning," says university President Lee
Bollinger. Meanwhile, the New York Times Magazine offers a rosy portrait
of California after the abolition of affirmative action. Minority students who
once might have been admitted to the system's best schools are now finding
places at lower-tier schools. More important, the new dispensation has
encouraged state universities to step up their efforts to recruit students from
low-performing high schools, often with positive results.

            

               businesschool.com
            

            Junk
bond king Michael Milken and the University of Chicago are partnering in an online business school
venture. The University of Chicago has just announced a deal with UNEXT.com, an online
education company partly funded by Milken and headed by a Chicago trustee.
University officials anticipate $20 million in revenues just in the next five
years. But faculty members are concerned about conflicts of interest, not only
on the part of the trustee, Andrew Rosenfield, but also because UNEXT's
investors include two University of Chicago economics professors, Gary Becker
and Merton Miller, as well as the university's law school dean, Daniel Fischel.
Fischel is also the author of Payback: The Conspiracy To Destroy Michael
Milken and His Financial Revolution . Administrators protest that they are
only keeping pace with their competitors: UNEXT has already signed on with Columbia, while Harvard, Stanford, and Cornell are
considering commercial partners for their own online programs.

            
               UC-Berkeley Folds
...
            

            A
monthlong protest by students in Berkeley's ethnic studies department, marked by a hunger strike and
129 arrests, ended in near complete capitulation by the administration, which promised
more tenure-track faculty and a research center. The "Third World Liberation
Front" demonstrators argued that over the last decade Berkeley had neglected
its ethnic studies department, failing to fill positions in fields such as
Chicano and Native American studies. The agreement calls for a committee of
students and faculty members to design a five-year plan to guide the
department's hiring strategy.

            
               ... And So Does
Anna Quindlen
            

            
Protests by anti-abortion activists at Villanova University convinced former New York
Times columnist Anna Quindlen to bow out as a commencement speaker. The
best-selling novelist would have been the third member of her family to receive
an honorary degree from the Catholic university near Philadelphia. Quindlen, a
board member of the National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League, had no
plans to discuss abortion in her address--"I would have talked about the sheer
pleasure of living," she told the Philadelphia Inquirer . She added that
she didn't want to divert attention from the students on their graduation day.
The protesters were only half-mollified by Quindlen's gesture: The president of
American Collegians for Life regrets that the university did not revoke the
invitation first.

            
               Yo Queerio, Taco
Bell
            

            Under
a "Missionary Positions" theme, the National
Association for Chicana and Chicano Studies met in San
Antonio, Texas, to focus on sexuality, a topic long considered taboo in the
Latino community. As the Los Angeles Times reports, about 1,000 scholars
gathered to hear papers on subjects that ranged from "Latina rage" to "joto"
(queer) scholarship to Chicano rap music and machismo. Alicia
Gaspar de Alba, a professor at the University of California Los Angeles,
declared that Chicano studies has "finally been won by feminists and people in
gender studies." But Juan Rodriguez, a professor at Texas Lutheran University
and a member of the association since 1974, predicted a "backlash" in a few
years: "Academics are no more enlightened than anyone else."

            
               Atlas Shrugs at No.
1
            

            At the end of April,
Random House posted
two lists of the top 100 nonfiction titles of the 20 th century--one
as judged by the Modern Library's "board" (Caleb Carr, Elaine Pagels, Stephen
Jay Gould, Jon Krakauer, and Arthur Schlesinger Jr., among others) and the
other as judged by the "readers," or basically anyone who voted for his or her
favorite book on the Modern Library Web site. Topping the "board" list is The
Education of Henry Adams , by Henry Adams. The "readers" gave Ayn Rand four
titles in the top 10, including the top slot. In response, the feisty journal
Philosophy and Literature has inaugurated a different kind of discussion
on its listserv . Its members are posting their votes for the
worst books. Rand has proved to be a listserv favorite, though John
Steinbeck's Cannery Row and Martin Amis' The Information have
also garnered mentions.

         
      
   
