
   
   
      
         
            The Smell of a Deal

            The new flurry of efforts to broker a diplomatic
solution to the Kosovo crisis alarmed the British conservative newspapers
Monday. The Times , the Daily Telegraph , and the Financial Times all urged President Clinton to stand
firm and intensify the war. "The smell of a deal is in the air," said the
Telegraph , disapprovingly. In an editorial headlined "Dealing with the
devil," the paper reminded Clinton that NATO's peace conditions "run counter to
everything that Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic stands for." "Having
foolishly tied his hands behind his back by eschewing ground action, Mr.
Clinton may be looking for an easy way out," it warned. "It is up to his
allies, in particular Tony Blair, to stiffen his resolve that NATO's demands be
met in full. ... The current whirl of diplomatic activity calls for especial
vigilance on the West's part."

            An editorial in the Times said it was time
for the "listening President" to speak with a firmer voice. "The strong US
public support for NATO's intervention could weaken in the face of
indecisiveness," it said. "If Mr. Clinton is to avoid a groundswell of get out,
he must show that he is prepared to go in with whatever force it takes, and
stay in until the only guns in Kosovo belong to NATO and all the Kosovans, like
the three [American] servicemen, can go home again." The Financial Times
said that the only way out for Milosevic was to accept NATO's conditions in
full. "He must do so clearly, addressing NATO leaders directly," it said.
"Nothing less will do."

            The liberal British newspapers, the Guardian and the
Independent , carried no war editorials Monday, but the
Guardian ran one in praise of the Rev. Jesse Jackson, whose triumph in
getting the three servicemen released has been greeted with cynicism by the
U.S. political establishment. Saying it was time for such cynicism to stop, the
paper claimed, that for all his "media grandstanding" and his repeated failure
to see major projects through, "he remains an inspiration for millions of
Americans, not least in motivating them to vote." "Moreover, he continues to
advocate the integrationist ideal of his mentor Martin Luther King," it said.
The picture of him linking arms with the white and Hispanic soldiers "will
exert great power in the United States, and Jesse Jackson should be applauded
for making it happen," it added.

            The Independent ran a bitter commentary by
its veteran war correspondent Robert Fisk comparing the attention paid to the
release of the three soldiers in Belgrade to that of the deaths of 60 civilians
in a NATO bomb attack that destroyed a bus last Saturday. Noting that NATO's
only comment on the latter event was the passive phrase, "it is regretted,"
Fisk said NATO wants us to believe that it has reserved its sorrow for the
Albanian refugees expelled from Kosovo. But personally he didn't believe "that
NATO feels this sense of outrage as strongly as it claims." He compared NATO's
attitude to that of a person who crosses a city street to help an innocent
civilian who is being attacked. "What NATO has done--faced with the atrocities
of Kosovo--has been to stay on the other side of the road, to make a note of
the criminal's address, and to throw stones through the window of his home
later that night," he wrote. "Not a single NATO life has been lost in five
weeks of war in the Balkans--because we do not regard the catastrophe of the
Kosovo Albanians as worth a single NATO life. It's as simple as that."

            In an interview with the French Sunday newspaper
Le Journal du Dimanche , Russian Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov said
Moscow would be willing to send troops under U.N. command to enforce a peace
accord in Kosovo. Once again, he called the NATO bombing campaign "a tragic
mistake" and said: "There are no good chess players among the leaders of NATO.
... Before moving a pawn, you have to assess all the possible strategies of
your adversary." In an editorial Monday, Le Figaro of Paris said that, by contrast, Milosevic
has shown great talent as a chess player. By moving the war to the terrain of
American public opinion with his release of the three soldiers, he was
attempting a final maneuver. "Having been put in check, the king can always
castle," the paper explained. "He knows he has lost the game, but he still
isn't naked." By freeing the hostages, Milosevic has opened a crack in the door
on the eve of the meeting between Clinton and Russian mediator Viktor
Chernomyrdin. "He knows he is in check, but he wants to avoid check-mate,"
Le Figaro said. Libération , in its main front-page headline, called the
release of the soldiers "a diplomatic ambush by Milosevic."

            In La Repubblica of Rome Monday, one of its correspondents in
Belgrade reported that Politika , the most widely read newspaper of the
Yugoslav capital, has maintained its circulation during the war despite being
despised as a Milosevic mouthpiece. This was entirely due to its daily five
pages of death announcements, the correspondent, Biljana Sbrljanovic, wrote,
although the number of these announcements has not grown since the NATO bombing
started. For the Serbs, these illustrated death notices were "more important
than death itself, because if Politika doesn't publish your photograph,
it is as if you haven't died." The regime is now censoring the death
announcements in order to conceal the number and the identities of the victims
of NATO's bombs, she wrote; but Sunday one notice slipped past the censors: a
young woman employee of the bombed Belgrade TV station whose body had only just
been found. The announcement said, enigmatically, that she had been "a victim
of the assassins who came from the sky and of those who came from the
ground."

            In Japan Monday, the Asahi Evening News
marked Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi's visit to the United States by publishing a
Gallup Poll, commissioned by the Japanese Foreign Ministry, showing that a
record 61 percent of Americans consider Japan to be a trustworthy partner. The
poll, conducted annually since 1960, also found that, for the first time since
the question was first asked in 1997, more than half of Americans said the
alliance is very important to U.S. national security. However, a Harris Poll
conducted in March for Asahi Shimbun showed that 49 percent of Americans
thought U.S. forces were in Japan in order to prevent the country from becoming
a military threat, the paper said.

            In Israel, Ha'aretz reported
prominently Monday that students studying criminology at Bar-Ilan University
were being required to read a textbook describing homosexuals as "criminals."
The book, The Making of a Criminal by Bar-Ilan Professor Moshe Adar,
asserted: "An honest person tends to see others as being honest as well; the
evil person sees evilness in others. The homosexual tends to blame his victim
for seducing him. ... The cheating merchant will worry that all the other
merchants are cheats and liars. The thief will accuse everyone of thievery."
The book was listed as required reading for two courses, Criminology and
Introduction to Psychopathology, the paper said. Third-year social science
students at Bar-Ilan said they would be tested on it in about two weeks.
University spokesman David Weinberg said Adar was "considered an expert in his
field, and has an international reputation," and that the university was
standing by him.

            Several British papers
carried a report Monday that Britain's largest supermarket chain has
asked fruit growers to supply it with smaller melons after research indicated
that housewives subconsciously compared them to the size of their breasts.
According to the Daily Telegraph , the Tesco chain has been told by a
psychologist "that the current preference for smaller busts--epitomized by the
model Kate Moss and the actress Gwyneth Paltrow--was the reason why the
traditional big, fleshy melons were remaining unsold."

         
      
   
