
   
   
      
         
            

            

               NATO 
               continued to bomb Yugoslavia. Scorecard:
Significant damage to the Serbs' air defenses and command centers, but not to
Serb ground forces, which are escalating their assaults on ethnic Albanians in
Kosovo. As of Friday morning, NATO had lost no pilots. Stress points: 1)
President Clinton told the Serbian people their leaders are to blame for
dragging them into a disastrous war, but so far the Serbs are rallying behind
their leaders and blaming NATO. 2) Congress and the American public are
cautiously supporting the bombing, but not the use of U.S. ground troops. 3)
Italy and Greece suggested resuming peace talks with the Serbs, but U.S.
officials say the allied coalition is holding firm. 4) Russia and China are
protesting loudly but aren't matching their harsh words with deeds. The naive
anti-bombing spin: NATO's bombs will never get the Serbs to accept NATO's peace
plan. The pro-bombing spin: NATO will soon attack the Serbs' tanks and troops
directly, crippling their ability to slaughter the Kosovars. The sophisticated
anti-bombing spin: That's when the Serbs will start shooting down the allies'
planes. (For the overseas' press reaction to the Kosovo airstrikes see "" and
".") (3/26/99)
            

            
Britain's
highest court issued a new ruling on the fate of Chilean Gen. Augusto
Pinochet . Spain is seeking his extradition from Britain on charges of
murder, torture, kidnapping, and conspiracy. Pinochet wants to return to Chile,
where he is immune from prosecution. The court ruled that 1) Pinochet can be
extradited but 2) only for crimes that are illegal in both Britain and Chile.
Since Britain didn't sign the global treaty on crimes against humanity until
1988, this means Pinochet's alleged pre-1988 crimes--nearly all the charges
against him--can't be used as a basis for extraditing him. Both sides are
happy: Pinochet's supporters now expect him to escape extradition, while human
rights activists hail the ruling as a sign that dictators who have committed
more recent crimes can be extradited. (3/26/99)
            

            
The forewoman
of the Lewinsky grand jury said she was willing to indict President
Clinton for perjury. The good news for Clinton: She voted for him, attended
a Democratic gala in his honor in 1997, says, "I absolutely love him" (in part
because he has blacks and other minorities on his staff), doubts he committed
obstruction of justice, and doesn't think he should have been removed from
office. The bad news: She says that he committed perjury (by denying that he
had sex with Monica Lewinsky) and that his sexual exploitation of Lewinsky was
"awful." She also says 1) Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr was just doing his
job; 2) she felt maternal sympathy for Lewinsky; and 3) the grand jurors were
suspicious of Linda Tripp and annoyed by her "self-righteousness."
(3/26/99)
            

            
Russian Prime
Minister Yevgeny Primakov canceled his visit to the United States . En
route to meet with President Clinton and leaders of the International Monetary
Fund, Primakov turned his plane around and went back to Moscow because NATO
decided to bomb Yugoslavia, despite Russia's vigorous opposition. The
pessimistic spin: This marks a "significant souring in the American-Russian
relationship" and "could poison discussions" on arms control, which are more
important than Yugoslavia. The optimistic spin: As long as we're holding the
purse strings and Primakov is hard up for cash, he'll be back. The in-between
spin: Canceling the visit offered both sides a graceful way to avoid a
face-to-face fight over Kosovo. (3/24/99)
            

            
Dr. Jack
Kevorkian is botching his murder trial . The prosecution's case relies on
a 60 Minutes video that shows Kevorkian giving a lethal injection to a
terminally ill man after obtaining the man's consent. Kevorkian, acting as his
own attorney, is arguing that it was a mercy killing. The judge has tried in
vain to explain to Kevorkian that mercy killing is not a valid defense against
a murder charge under Michigan law. The spins on Kevorkian's courtroom
performance, in order of ascending irony: 1) He's nuts. 2) He doesn't
understand the difference between morality and the law. 3) He's committing
legal malpractice. 4) He's killing himself. 5) He's unfit to make the legal
decisions by which he's killing himself. 6) He'll escape conviction thanks to
jury nullification yet again. (3/24/99)
            

            

               Jesse
Jackson won't run for president in 2000. Jackson's spin: He can do
more good by pressuring Wall Street to invest in poor communities. Other spins:
1) He decided he can't win. 2) His absence helps Vice President Al Gore by
clearing the field. 3) His absence helps former Sen. Bill Bradley, D-N.J., by
freeing up blacks and liberals sympathetic to Bradley's left-wing platform. 4)
Gore talked Jackson out of running. 5) On Gore's behalf, Clinton talked Jackson
out of running. 6) It doesn't matter much, since Gore has already wrapped up
the nomination. (3/24/99)
            

            

               
                  Shakespeare
                
               
                  in Love
                shocked
movie pundits by winning the Academy Award 
               for Best Picture .
Saving Private Ryan , which had been expected to win, instead received
four lesser awards, including best director (Steven Spielberg).
Shakespeare won seven awards, including best actress (Gwyneth Paltrow).
The happy spin: Love beats war. The half-cynical spin: Comedy beats tragedy.
The completely cynical spin: Disney-Miramax's publicity campaign for
Shakespeare beat DreamWorks-Paramount's publicity campaign for
Private Ryan . The ceremony's political controversy was a lifetime
achievement award for Elia Kazan, a director revered for his films but
ostracized by much of Hollywood for outing fellow Communists during the
McCarthy era. (3/22/99)
            

            
A Swiss
psychiatrist and his British co-pilot completed the first round-the-world
balloon trip . Their 20-day odyssey achieved aviation's most elusive goal,
beating more famous balloonists such as Steve Fossett and Richard Branson.
Their prize is $1 million--half the cost of their balloon. While applauding
co-pilot Brian Jones for overachieving, the media concluded in retrospect that
the pilot, Bertrand Piccard, had been destined for greatness, since his
grandfather was the first man to reach the stratosphere (in a balloon in 1931)
and his father had attained the oceans' lowest depth (35,000 feet). The spins:
1) The trip was a triumph of human ingenuity, skill, and endurance. 2) It was a
triumph of meteorological, communications, and auto-piloting technology, which
babysat the crew. 3) It was a triumph of lucky weather. (For more on the
species, see David Plotz's 1998 piece "") (3/22/99)
            

            
Duke,
Connecticut, Michigan State, and Ohio State reached the NCAA basketball
tournament's final four . Duke is the clear favorite to win it all, having
won 31 straight games. The Cinderella teams--Gonzaga, Southwest Missouri State,
and Miami of Ohio--were wiped out in the last two rounds, leaving no true
underdogs. Many fans are cheering Connecticut because the school has earned its
first final four appearance, having choked in the tournament in recent years.
Similarly, Michigan State is making its first such appearance in two decades.
The best story belongs to Ohio State, which was 8-22 last year and is the first
team ever to reach the final four without having qualified for the tournament
in the previous year. (3/22/99)
            

         
      
   
