
   
   
      
         
            Driving While Flossing

            

               Please send your questions for publication to  prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               My 12-year-old daughter is friends with a girl
whose single-parent mother is rarely at home. While I understand that she has
to work, I cannot understand why she chooses to spend most of her free time
with her boyfriend, who lives an hour away. The result is that her daughter is
at my house most days after school (well into the evening) as well as most
weekends. Her mother calls to check on her, but this is no substitute for the
time and attention her daughter needs.
            

            
               Both my daughter and
I feel very sorry for her friend and understand her unwillingness to be alone
so much, but I am concerned by her mother's neglect and resent the free
childcare. I have considered sending the mother a note but am convinced it
would only result in hurting the daughter and making her feel unwelcome in my
house. I do not want to be ungenerous to a child in need. How should I handle
this?
            

            

               --Concerned Mother
            

            Dear Con,

            Sending a note to this
neglectful mother, you correctly imagine, will not change the situation for the
better. The not-so-hot mother will become defensive, and one way or another the
kid will pay the price. It sounds to Prudie as though you and your daughter
like this child, so why don't you redo your thinking, privately, and come to
see this de facto member of your household as a kind of foster child. Think of
your open-door policy as an act of charity, a chance to make an important
contribution to a youngster's life. Your kind approach will also serve as a
model for your own daughter. If you think it useful, discuss your new approach
with your daughter. It can only help her if she knows her own mom is
consciously trying to make a difference. It can only be a wonderful lesson, by
example, for her to see generosity put into practice.

            
--Prudie, inclusively

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               Recently my wife wrote to you concerning my .
Your answer was predictable: It's unsafe; tell him to do this in private. Well,
my wife nearly fainted to see me castigated in public, no less on the
Internet!
            

            
               However, I feel constrained to respond. I never
do this in an unsafe driving situation--i.e., curves, crowded lanes, etc. I've
done this all over the United States, in New England mostly on the turnpike,
with never a mishap. My wife cannot say the same ... and she doesn't floss
while driving. I guess what I'm trying to say is, if a person can maintain
control of the situation, he shouldn't be found guilty of not operating
according to the manual.
            

            
               Thanks for letting
me vent.
            

            

               --Flosser's mate
            

            Dear Floss,

            One might surmise that
your driving record while flossing is better than the beloved's with both her
hands free. Perhaps this is a tug of war where the rope is, symbolically,
dental floss. Prudie hopes you two can settle this matter amicably so that the
next step is not clenched teeth.

            
--Prudie, prophylactically

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Some weeks ago I made the acquaintance of a new
co-worker (of the opposite sex). We hit it off well, and I asked him to lunch.
After some scheduling problems we managed the meal and had, I thought, a
charming time. After that he was quite pleasant when we ran into each other.
Recently I asked him to join me again for lunch. He pleaded the press of work
and asked for a raincheck. After letting a week tactfully pass, I asked again.
He again declined, mentioning the proverbial raincheck. His manner has
definitely changed, and I know he's going to some lengths to avoid me.
            

            
               Needless to say I am disappointed, but I'm
certainly not planing to press my attentions on him. Unfortunately the
atmosphere now feels strained. Should I speak to him or just let matters rest?
I'm puzzled.
            

            
               Thanks for your
assistance.
            

            

               --Lunchless
            

            Dear Lunch,

            To pass on a wise nugget
from Prudie's favorite, Dorothy Parker: It's not the tragedies of life that
defeat you, it's the messes. What has happened is that the object of your
attention began to feel crowded ... for whatever reason. It could be that he
found you more aggressive than was comfortable, since the first and
second invitations were yours. It could be that while he behaved politely, the
initial lunch was not as charming as you thought. It could be that he intuited
more of an interest on your part than he was prepared to deal with. He could
very well be neurotic, or you may not be aware of your own firepower. Whatever
the actuality, he is definitely ducking you, and your next move should be this:
Behave in a cordial, correct, and distant manner. When you encounter him,
simply nod, smile, and keep going. This approach is the best thing for both of
you.

            
--Prudie, plainly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               I just received a
wedding invitation via e-mail at work. It's from a person I don't really know
that well. I will not attend. Am I obligated to send a gift?
            

            

               --eg244
            

            Dear eg,

            A wedding invitation via
e-mail? At work? And you don't know the person well? My, my, how outré .
Do not even think of responding with a gift. What might be in order, however,
is a certificate of chutzpah .

            
--Prudie, properly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               I have just written
a letter to a friend I have been out of touch with for several years. He and I
were the closest of buddies. Then my friend moved away from our small hometown
and married. We both settled down ... considerably. I have written to him a
couple of times over the last few years and have received no response. I would
really like to reawaken the friendship. Any suggestions?
            

            

               --Anonymous in Wyoming
            

            Dear Anon,

            The ways of the world
are largely a matter of guesswork. Your letter has every indication that your
pal from the old days is uninterested in picking up the thread. One might
postulate a number of reasons. Your youthful best pal may not remember things
the way you do, he may be disinclined to pick up a long-distance friendship,
or, sadly, his life may have gone haywire and he just isn't up to rejuvenating
the old bond. Do leave things alone, and accept that you may never know the
underlying reasons.

            --Prudie, regretfully

         
      
   
