
   
   
      
         
             How Big a Safety Net?

            Why do we have a social safety net? It depends on
whom you ask. Some say it's a matter of political prudence (e.g. "The
alternative to a safety net is a revolution"). Others say it's a moral
imperative.
       Among the latter, the most influential is Harvard University professor
of philosophy John Rawls. Rawls likens the safety net to an insurance payout.
Here's his argument: Back before you were born--in fact, before you were even
conceived--nobody knew you were going to develop into the sort of sophisticated
individual who reads 
                  Slate
               . For all anyone knew, you might have
been born without enough skills to boot up a computer--or to earn a decent
living.

            If your unborn soul
could have bought an insurance contract, then you'd probably have snapped up
some kind of "skill insurance" in which everybody pays premiums, and those who
land in the shallow end of the gene pool split the pot.
       Of course, you didn't buy insurance. But that's only because
there are no telephones in the world-before-birth, so the insurance salesmen
couldn't contact you. According to Rawls and his followers, you would have
bought the insurance if you could have, and that creates a moral obligation
upon all to pay the premiums.
       That's a very powerful argument, but it's incomplete. Here's why: It
offers no estimate of how much insurance your unborn self would have
wanted. Rawls says we should enforce a bunch of hypothetical insurance
contracts, but you can't enforce a contract if you don't know what it says. So,
to convert the Rawlsian argument into a concrete policy, you first have to
determine what terms we'd have written into those pre-birth agreements.

            
Here's how the philosophers solve that problem:
They guess. Most of them guess that our unborn selves would all have cheerfully
signed on for a pretty substantial welfare state. Being an economist and not a
philosopher, I am inclined to think about such questions a little more
deeply.
       How much insurance would an unborn soul want to buy? We already know a
lot about the demand for insurance from available data on how much of it (fire,
life, disability, auto, etc.) people in the real world buy.
       Some people demand more insurance than others do because they face more
risk. So before we can estimate how much skill insurance your pre-birth self
might have purchased, we must first estimate how much risk you were facing when
God was handing out the brains.

            
The right way to measure risk is to measure the
statistical variance of the possible outcomes. In this case, that means
measuring the statistical variance of human talents. You can't measure talent
directly, but you can measure it indirectly--say by observing people with
similar education and training, and measuring the variance in their earnings.
After you've controlled for education and training, earnings are at least a
rough measure of talent.
       Once you've measured that variance, you've measured the risk, so you can
go back to the insurance markets and observe how much insurance people choose
to buy when they're facing similar risk levels. That gives at least a rough
estimate of how much we should all be paying into the general welfare pool.

            
Economists James Kahn (of the New York Federal
Reserve Bank) and Hugo Hopenhayn (of the University of Rochester) recently
sacrificed a lunch hour and the back of an envelope to computing that rough
estimate. The bottom line turns out to be astounding: If you take the insurance
metaphor seriously, then 23 percent of the population--the 23 percent with the
fewest skills--should be permanently unemployed and on welfare. In other words,
the present-day welfare state is not nearly as large as it ought to be. So, if
the Rawlsian philosophers had bothered to do a little arithmetic, they might
have discovered that their arguments are a lot stronger than they dared to
expect.
       But Kahn and Hopenhayn's arithmetic leaves something out. They
implicitly assumed that it would be costless to identify the people with the
fewest skills so that we can put only those people on the dole. That assumption
becomes invalid if highly skilled people can hide their abilities in an attempt
to defraud the system. Policing such fraud can make social insurance policies
considerably more expensive, and when insurance is more expensive, people want
less of it. Factor that into the equation, redo the calculations, and
you end up concluding that the fraction of the population on welfare should be
just 0.6 percent--in other words, practically zero.

            
The truth probably lies somewhere in between 23
percent and 0.6 percent: We can't costlessly observe each other's skills, but
we can't costlessly hide our own skills, either. In other words, maybe the
social net should be drastically expanded, and maybe it should be drastically
slashed. Not too definitive a conclusion. But it's the result of just one
afternoon's work, and it's more precise than anything the philosophers have
come up with in the quarter century since Rawls first made his argument.
       Personally, I'm not sold on the insurance metaphor to begin with, for
reasons that could fill a separate column. But the broader point is that if
your argument is based on metaphors, you should be prepared to treat those
metaphors with respect. If the safety net is really just like insurance, then
we should be buying it in quantities commensurate with our other insurance
purchases. And we should be making an honest effort to calculate what those
quantities are. The philosophers don't seem willing to meet that
responsibility. That's why we need economists.

         
      
   
