
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist
               
               , May 1
            

            The cover story predicts that the disappearance of privacy
will bring about "one of the greatest social changes of modern times."
Technology is destroying privacy that we took for granted 20 years ago, but the
corresponding benefits--better government services, cheaper products, less
crime--may outweigh that loss. ... An editorial sighs that Milosevic's firing of his most
liberal aide bodes poorly for a compromise in the Kosovo war. ... The
magazine slams the recent spate of millenially inspired "best"
books lists and recommends 
                  Slate
               's very own instead.

            
               
                  New
Republic
               
               , May 17
            

            The cover story describes the Palestinians' shriveling
economy and corrupt political system. Palestinians now level their anger at
their own rotten leadership as well as at Israel. (Intifada-era graffiti has
been painted over with phrases such as "Confront corruption and patronage!")
Some right-wing Islamic factions aspire to replace the current government with
a theocracy similar to the Sudan's. ... Holocaust scholar Daniel Jonah
Goldhagen asserts that Serbia's crimes are "different from those
of Nazi Germany only in scale." He also argues that an allied victory could
stimulate a postwar democratic transformation of Yugoslavia similar to that of
West Germany after World War II.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine
               
               , May 2
            

            The cover story contends
that eliminating affirmative action does not devastate equal opportunity in
higher education. Only six of 74 public colleges, universities, and graduate
programs in California and Texas suffered losses in minority enrollment
following affirmative-action bans. California's Proposition 209 sent minorities
"cascading" to less prestigious California universities but caused university
heads to adopt more "holistic" admissions criteria--e.g., giving more weight to
nonacademic achievements--to bolster minority enrollment. ... A profile
condemns the coach-choking (and uncoachable) Latrell Sprewell for crushing the
New York Knicks' NBA championship hopes: His nihilism and selfishness have
sapped his teammates' will to win. ... A Susan Sontag essay riffs on the
Kosovo crisis, concluding that it is a just war to deter "radical evil" and
that the allies will fail if they don't oust Milosevic.

            
               
                  Time and
Newsweek
               
               , May 3
            

            The newsweeklies
reconstruct the Littleton massacre and solicit expert opinions on why it
happened. Newsweek 
               says that teen-agers kill when pre-existing biological flaws
are exacerbated by poor nurturing. Biological warning signs: low heart rates
and swollen brain lesions. Other post-massacre advice: Time 
               recommends that high schools provide counseling to "help
bullies deal with frustration," and Newsweek 
               writes that kids should vet their peers' comments ("Mrs.
Jones gave me a D, and I could just kill her for that.") for homicidal
tendencies.

            Both magazines print blueprints for a ground war in
Kosovo. Time 
               inventories the troops, time, casualties, and money necessary
to carry out four different plans, from limited force (10,000 troops, 2-3 weeks
of prep time, 500 dead, and $5 billion) to full-on occupation of Yugoslavia
(200,000 troops, 4-6 months of prep time, 5,000-10,000 dead, and $25 billion).
A retired Army officer tells 
               Newsweek that NATO could retake Kosovo in a
brief ground attack (100,000 troops, 2-3 months of prep, and 10,000-30,000
Serb casualties).

            
               Newsweek

               reports that black athletes are shunning white agents for
black ones. Among the black agents courting rookies are Puffy Combs, Master P,
and Johnnie Cochran.

            
               
                  U.S. News
& World Report
               
               , May 3
            

            The cover
story details the disturbing behavior of the Littleton killers
before last week's massacre. Every kid at school knew about the
Trenchcoat Mafia, but Columbine adults were unaware of its existence. A
sidebar stresses the dangers of bullying, which causes 8
percent of school kids to miss "a day of class monthly" and 43 percent to fear
using school bathrooms. ... A writer goes inside the Air Force surveillance planes
currently searching Kosovo for Serbian tanks. Despite the planes' detection
techniques, sometimes "you don't know if it's some civilian driving to the
grocery store, or a military vehicle," says an intelligence officer. ...
A piece calls Frank Lloyd Wright an awful engineer. His
masterpiece, Fallingwater, has been girded by steel scaffolding to prevent it
from crumbling.

            
               
                  Weekly
Standard
               
               , May 3
            

            An editorial warns that
the president may lose both the war in Kosovo and his strong popular support if
he continues to dither over the use of ground troops. ... Another
editorial defends the "incrementalist" positions that George W. Bush and
Elizabeth Dole have taken on abortion. Their hesitantly pro-life platforms are
useful token gestures "of occasional conformity with the governing [pro-choice]
orthodoxy." (For 
                  Slate
                Editor Michael Kinsley's take on this
topic, see the April 17 ".")

         
      
   
