
   
   
      
         
            No. 210: &quot;TK&quot;

            

               The whistle, the clanging, it's a good noise," said Dennis Brady, "a
noise that's supposed to be there." Where?
            

             

            by noon
ET Thursday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               
                  Tuesday's Question
(No. 208)--"Favorite Things":
               

               

                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Urine-absorbing disposable
diapers, mistake-eradicating liquid paper, bullet-stopping Kevlar--what's the
connection?
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               

               
"They're all items in the complimentary gift pack given to visitors at the
Ronald Reagan Presidential Library."-- Larry Amaros ( Tim Carvell ,
Steve Bodow , Wade Carvell , Kate Wing , Dale Shuger ,
Eric Fredericksen , and Al Petrosky had similar answers.)

               "Elia
Kazan will bring all three to the Oscars. The liquid paper is to fix the signs
of protesters, while the diapers and Kevlar are just precautionary."-- Nell
Scovell (similarly, Beth Sherman and James Urbaniak )

               "TThe
era in mistakes were evident has ended. Viva misteaks. No more xxx-ing out
words or axidental shootings. No more pee-induced discomfort."-- Deidre
Pike
               

               "None
has proved any less useless for stopping missiles than what we're building
now."-- Chris Kelly
               

               "Three
things you will need if you are a 110-year-old black writer intent on composing
your autobiography on a manual typewriter in an outdoor location where New York
police officers may happen to walk by."-- Francis Heaney
               

                

                

               Click
for more answers.

               
                  Randy's
Wrap-Up
               

            

            In a tight News Quiz race
for Living National Symbol of Old Age, Ronald Reagan just edged out Strom
Thurmond. But the fact is neither man can live forever. Can he? No, no, no. Of
course not. So it's not too soon to think about a replacement. Reagan's persona
was genial but addlepated old fool; Thurmond's was mean-spirited but
concupiscent old racist. Who will be our next cartoon old-timer, and what
particular geriatric qualities will he or she embody? Charlton
Heston--coldhearted but handsome old bully? Leni Riefenstahl--satanic yet
visually gifted old narcissist? Nominations welcome.

            
               Inventive
Answer
            

            Each was invented by a woman.

            Between 1790 and 1984, only 1.5 percent of those
receiving patents were women, notes Sabra Chartrand in the New York
Times . From 1984 to 1996, that increased to 9.2 percent. When they were
more house-bound, many women inventors devised solutions to domestic problems.
This is no longer the case. In 1998, 15.7 percent of the scientific and
engineering patents went to women, many of whom won not as independents, but as
employees of corporations or members of research teams.

            March is Women's History
Month and National Inventors' Month.

            
               New and Improved
Extra
            

            
               Actual headline
               :
Richard Bernstein's review of the latest volume of Henry Kissinger's memoirs:
"An Architect of Diplomacy Seeks Détente with History"

            
               Improved
headline
               : "Self-Serving Guff Written in Blood of
Cambodians"

            
               Actual event 
               at Monday
night's Drama League benefit: Mary Tyler Moore, Diane Sawyer, Katie
Couric, and Liz Smith dance in a number from Cabaret .

            
               Improved benefit
event
               : Mary Tyler Moore, Diane Sawyer, Katie Couric,
and Liz Smith swim laps in a big tank of lobsters.

            
               Actual 
               headline from a
New York Times music review: "Holocaust Inspires New Work"

            
               Crazy dream world
headline
               : "Holocaust Inspires Quiet, Respectful
Contemplation"

            
               Actual Associated Press item :
"Charles Manson's guitar was smashed by three inmates."

            
               Unlikely version of
story
               , but wouldn't it make a swell Police Academy
movie?: "Three inmates were smashed by Charles Manson's guitar."

            
               It's Tim Carvell
Day
            

            McSweeney's Internet
Tendency, the online outpost of the delightful humor magazine, is currently
featuring Tim's "The Talent Competition." California, the balmy home of the
next Democratic National Convention, is currently featuring Tim himself.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            The Monkees and the Reagans.

         
      
   
