
   
   
      
         
             Leak and Load

            Nostradamus apparently
works in the Pentagon. According to the April 12 U.S. News & World
Report , this is what the Joint Chiefs of Staff concluded before the
Kosovo operation: "If we bomb ... we will eliminate Milosevic's domestic
opposition, and he will become a hero. He will go into Kosovo and slaughter
thousands of Kosovar Albanians and create thousands of refugees. Air power or
bombing cannot stop any of those things."

            The front page of
Monday's Washington Post confirmed the prophecy, revealing that the
Joint Chiefs had "expressed deep reservations" in advance of the proposed
bombing. The New York Times reported that the Pentagon had warned the
administration that "Milosevic was likely to strike out viciously against
Kosovo Albanians."

            These wise men who saw in their crystal ball exactly what
would happen in Kosovo are truly prophets without honor. These
prognostications--divulged anonymously by "senior military officials" and
"Pentagon planners" and "officers who know [the Joint Chiefs'] thinking but
decline to be named"--represent a particularly demoralizing aspect of modern
war-making: leaking as Pentagon policy.

            Covering your ass is, of
course, a time-honored military tradition, enshrined with its own acronym. But
what is remarkable about the Kosovo leaks is that they are covering something
that is not being shot at. No one--literally no one --is blaming the U.S.
military for the shortcomings of the Kosovo mission. All fault has been
deposited on the doorsteps of the White House and the State Department.
Politicians, not generals, made the risky decisions, and politicians, not
generals, are getting reproached for them. But no matter. As soon as it became
clear that the mission had gone awry, Pentagon brass began leaking
profligately: In the span of a few days, anonymous quotes appeared in the
Post , New York Times , Los Angeles Times , Washington
Times , Wall Street Journal , and all three newsweeklies. The gist of
the leaks: The Joint Chiefs knew this would happen, they told the
administration this would happen, so don't blame them.

            The leaks stem from a basic military practice:
worst-casing. During Vietnam, generals insisted to their civilian bosses that
we could win if we just had a little more time and firepower. Today's armed
forces won't make the same mistake. "They don't want to be put in a hopeless
position and get blamed for it. This is a product of Vietnam," says George
Washington University military historian Ronald Spector.

            So even as the brass announces incessantly that
"America has the finest fighting force the world has ever known," it responds
bleakly to any presidential proposal to actually deploy that force. A top
Pentagon officer from the Gulf War describes the generals' standard procedure:
"They tell the White House, 'You are going to need an overwhelming amount of
stuff. It's a bad idea. There will be terrible casualties. We recommend you
don't do it.' "

            "You always make
sure you have protested before," says American University Professor Amos
Perlmutter. In Kosovo, for example, the generals said that a ground invasion
would require 200,000 troops (a number they knew was impossibly high) and that
bombing wouldn't work. This worst-casing has two results: 1) The politicians
are left wondering whether to believe the generals, since they say this
every time; and 2) the military assures itself a victory in the war that
matters in Washington, the PR war.

            If the pols overrule the generals and the mission goes
sour, the generals are safe, on-the-record with sensible objections that can be
leaked at an opportune moment (as with Kosovo). If the pols overrule and the
mission succeeds, the generals still harvest the credit. No one remembers their
poor-mouthing. Who recalls that Gen. Colin Powell predicted horrible casualties
in the Gulf War?

            It's worth noting that
the Joint Chiefs probably did not warn against the mission as emphatically or
prophetically as the leaks claim. Clinton, after all, is incredibly deferential
to his Joint Chiefs because of his own history of nonservice: It's impossible
to believe that he would have overruled the chiefs if they were as absolute as
the leaks suggest. Most experts also doubt the Joint Chiefs were unified in the
view that bombing wouldn't succeed: It's Air Force doctrine that bombing
will succeed in such circumstances, so Air Force advisers almost
certainly predicted a bombing triumph. Moreover, the generals' public behavior
casts doubt on the claim that they foresaw what Milosevic would do if we
bombed. The only public concerns the generals voiced before bombing were that
pilots would be vulnerable to Yugoslavia's missile defenses: They did not
discuss the possibility that Milosevic would respond by accelerating his
slaughter of Kosovars.

            There is nothing wrong with the Joint Chiefs warning the
administration privately that bombing was folly. In fact, it would be derelict
for the generals not to warn the administration of that. But
after-the-fact anonymous leaks are corrupting. The military is
(theoretically) a nonpolitical institution, but as soon as the operation went
south, the military abandoned its nonpolitical façade to protect itself. From
four-stars to privates, the armed forces loathe and distrust Clinton, and the
generals certainly weren't going to risk being associated with his Kosovo mess.
So they leaked to guarantee that they would not be blamed for a quagmire or be
punished at budget time--and to ensure that Clinton would suffer. The backdoor
sniping has become so pernicious and prevalent that even retired Gen. George
Joulwan, NATO's military commander in the early '90s, pleaded on CNN's
Crossfire for the Pentagon to stop leaking and "pull the team
together."

            The principal reason the leaks are troubling is not
that they sabotage the relationship between the administration and the
Pentagon; that relationship is always shaky. They are troubling because they
may sabotage the mission itself. The leaks suggest to our NATO allies that the
U.S. military isn't seriously engaged in the operation. And the leaks suggest
to our own troops that their commanders secretly believe their mission is
dangerous, useless, and possibly doomed. No inside-the-beltway PR victory is
worth that kind of demoralization.

         
      
   
