
   
   
      
         
            Hungary for Invasion

            Quoting "a senior official
in the Clinton administration," the Guardian of London
claimed Monday in its main front-page story that the Pentagon is pushing for a
ground attack on Yugoslavia to overthrow President Slobodan Milosevic. "Key
figures in the Pentagon are proposing that the White House consider a
full-scale armored invasion of Serbia in which Nato would capture Belgrade,
topple Milosevic and haul the leaders of his regime before a war crimes
tribunal," wrote the paper's Washington correspondent. The invasion would be
launched from Hungary, he said. The report, like most others that have promoted
the ground war option, contained the now familiar dampener that NATO still
expects Milosevic to fall before a land invasion becomes necessary. More
dampeningly still, the Daily Telegraph of London led Monday with the news that British
Prime Minister Tony Blair, currently the most hawkish of the NATO leaders,
failed to sway his allies in favor of deploying ground troops.

            The press of each allied
nation had a different take Monday on both the war and the weekend's Washington
summit. The main German newspapers led Monday on NATO's new Strategic Concept,
which includes "out of area" military deployment if Western interests are
threatened. The conservative National Post of Canada welcomed this extension of NATO's
role but warned in an editorial that it should not be "a euphemism for global
humanitarian interventions more properly handled by the UN." Spain's
El Mundo and
El País both led on
NATO's pledges of military and economic help to Yugoslavia's neighbors in
return for their support against Milosevic. In Italy , La Stampa of Turin led on
Clinton playing "the Yeltsin card," while Corriere della Sera of
Milan splashed the news that NATO is ready to block even Russian tankers to
enforce its oil embargo against Yugoslavia. In Paris, Le Figaro led on the cost of
the war, warning that Europe is coming under pressure from the United States to
pay a larger share of it.

            An editorial in the Sunday Times said the
oil embargo and the use of Apache helicopters against Milosevic's tanks might
yet obviate the need for a ground war, but a report from Albania in the
Sunday Telegraph implied that the United States might never put the
helicopters into the air. Reporter Tim Butcher wrote that "the final elements
of the deployment are still not in place" and that there is no indication from
any NATO source of a willingness, yet, "to employ the Apache in Yugoslavia
where its low-flying tactics will expose it to ground fire." He said that "the
level of paranoia" about the Apaches, which are being protected by 3,000 U.S.
troops, suggests that they are intended to break Serb morale without actually
engaging in battle. "The Albanian press has had a field day, reporting that
they are armed with nuclear weapons," he added.

            (Last Friday, the independent Albanian daily
Gazeta Shqiptare claimed that the Serbs have started using chemical and
biological weapons against the Kosovo Liberation Army. It said that a shell
containing radioactive materials and neurotoxins had been fired Thursday near
the Kosovo-Albanian border and paralyzed a KLA soldier. Traces of "altropine,"
an antidote to chemical weapons, had been found by the KLA on the bodies of
dead Serb soldiers, it added.)

            In a commentary in the
Sunday Telegraph , military historian John Keegan accused media
commentators of becoming dangerously obsessed with what politicians such as
Clinton and Blair are saying about the progress of the war instead of focusing
on what is actually happening in the field. "Last week's euphoric discussion of
the significance of the deployment of 24 Apache helicopters shows how
unrealistic media assessments of the evolution of Nato's war effort is," he
wrote. "The United States lost 5,000 helicopters in Vietnam, out of a
helicopter force many times larger than that. It also did not win the Vietnam
war." In another example of Apache skepticism, the Sunday Telegraph 's
defense correspondent pointed out that the Pentagon had promised April 4 that
the Apaches would be getting "up close and personal to the Milosevic armor
units in Kosovo" within days, while three weeks later Task Force Hawk is "still
weeks away from performing any sort of combat mission."

            Writing in the paper's "Review" section, Oxford historian
Niall Ferguson said that the slaughters in Kosovo and at Columbine High School
and the nail bomb attack last week in London's black neighborhood of Brixton
are all linked to one person--Adolf Hitler. "From beyond his unknown grave,
Hitler has a hand in all these apparently unrelated events," he wrote.
Criticizing Clinton's and Blair's overuse of Third Reich analogies in their
anti-Milosevic rhetoric, Ferguson said it would not do for them to say that the
current airstrikes against Serbia are based on the lessons of the past.

            In the 1930s, it was not
Hitler's opponents but rather his appeasers who, like NATO leaders today,
exaggerated the effectiveness of air power. "Does anyone out there want to
argue that Hitler could have been defeated by a policy of air strikes to
'degrade the Nazi military machine' without the deployment of ground forces
other than in a 'permissive' environment?" he asked. "Invoking the memory of
the Second World War, Clinton and Blair have picked a fight with one little
Hitler [Milosevic]," Ferguson concluded. "They should not now be surprised if,
even in the obscurity of Littleton and Brixton, they have to fight some even
littler Hitlers, too."

            In a front-page story, the Sunday Telegraph revealed
that Blair has regularly consulted Margaret Thatcher on the Kosovo conflict. In
a number of telephone calls, all initiated by Blair and some lasting as long as
30 minutes, she urged him to "stiffen the spine" of the Americans, as she had
done when she chided President Bush for going "wobbly" during the Gulf War.

            In an editorial on the Littleton massacre, the Independent on
Sunday warned against dismissing it as a problem unique to gun-crazy
America. The problem, it said, is a wider one "to do with the increasing
solipsism of the world in which our teenagers live." Not only do they "retreat
into bedrooms which seem as self-contained as an astronaut's capsule, each with
its own TV, stereo-system and wired-up computer," but into an "increasingly
self-referential and self-validating" worldview. The things that once linked
teen-agers to the value systems of the rest of society have gone, as have "the
frameworks of reality which placed social restraints on the individual's
freedom to think, say, do, or buy whatever is desired."

            Last Friday's bombing of a Serbian TV station was much
criticized in Europe over the weekend. Le Monde 's editorial Sunday said the action might be
"terribly counterproductive" because it won't change the minds of Serbs who
believe Milosevic's propaganda, but it will appear pointlessly destructive of
human lives to those who don't. It could also have "devastating" effects on
Western opinion by giving the impression that NATO is only bombing buildings in
Belgrade because it is incapable of taking on the Serb military units in
Kosovo, where Milosevic appears "to have all the time he needs to empty
villages, mine frontiers, bury his tanks and armored vehicles, and install
artillery batteries opposite the KLA bases in Albania."

            In Hong Kong, the
South China Morning
Post led Monday with what is said was "the biggest protest in Beijing
since the Tiananmen pro-democracy movement began 10 years ago this month." The
story also made the front page of the New York Times and the Financial Times of London, which
said that more than 10,000 members of a mystic cult called Fa Lun Gong caused
acute embarrassment to security forces by virtually surrounding the compound
where China's leaders work. It said the cult "claims 100 million members and
sees human corruption in everything from homosexuality to rock and roll and
drugs."

             

         
      
   
