
   
   
      
         
            No. 196: &quot;To Go&quot;

            

               China has already got rid of 66,000, and by year's end will remove
another 800,000. What?
            

             

            by noon
ET Wednesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               
                  Monday's Question
(No. 195)--"Suggestive Gestures":
               

               

                  
                     
                        Last week, the British government received a letter
offering advice on an ongoing investigation. From whom; suggesting
what?
                     
                  
               

               "From
Christopher Hitchens, claiming he knows EVERYTHING."-- Fred Graver
( Chris Kelly had a similar answer, with dandruff and gin.)

               "Ken
Starr intimating Clinton knows more about Jack the Ripper than he's saying. (I
hear Vernon Jordan tried to get him a job at Revlon.)"-- Beth Sherman
(similarly, Steve Spencer and Al Petrosky )

               "Oscar
Mayer to the Brits: 'Do what we do. Grind it, spice it, case it, pack it, ship
it. Call it Crazy Dogs.' "-- Marshall Efron
               

               "Me,
suggesting that, in light of recent events, the investigators looking into
Princess Diana's death might want to see whether Kate Moss was driving around
Paris on the night in question."-- Tim Carvell
               

               "The
pope, suggesting that Gen. Pinochet not be extradited to Spain. The pope did,
however, suggest the extradition of Tinky Winky, for 'crimes against God.'
"--Alex Balk
               

               Click
for more answers.

            

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            To News Quiz participants, "investigation" is not
theological (angels?), financial (angles?), historical (Engels?), or scientific
(something about string theory and tangles?); "investigation" means crime
pursued by Ken Starr.

            In the 19 th century it meant Pinkerton's,
which yesterday agreed to be purchased by Sweden's Securitas AB for $384
million. Founded in 1850 by Scottish immigrant Allan Pinkerton, the firm ran
Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid out of the country on behalf of wealthy
railroad owners, and beat the heck out of striking workers on behalf of anyone
with a few bucks. It also thwarted a plot to assassinate Abraham Lincoln, and
thank God for that, for the entire course of history might have been different
had the Great Emancipator been cut down. (Oh, all right; they uncovered an 1861
plot, a whole other thing. But I still blame them for "Raindrops Keep Falling
on My Head.")

            "You need to do more than
post a guard with a doughnut and a nightstick," said financial analyst John
Schnelle, commenting favorably on the merger. "If you are going to enter the
global market, why not do it with a marquee name?" Like, say, Starr?

            
               Humanitarian
Answer
            

            As Alex Balk knew, the Foreign Office received a
plea from the pope to free Augusto Pinochet, reports the Times of
London.

            Lord Lamont of Lerwick,
the former chancellor who elicited the written appeal, said, "I suspect that
the representations have been made at the highest level, recognising the
General's great contribution to protecting freedom during the Cold War."
Speaking of the pope, Lord Lamont added: "Having lived in Poland, he
understands what a Marxist dictatorship is all about. As a great Christian
leader, he values human life and he understands what happened in Chile. As an
ironist ..." Well, OK, I added the final phrase.

            
               Daniel Radosh's
Anniversary Extra
            

            Part of the official celebration of News Quiz New
Year. By mayoral order, fireworks and criticism are prohibited.

            What do Web surfers think
of us here at the News Quiz? For answers, turn to the Excite search engine,
where, when you enter a phrase, the site automatically suggests "select words
to add to your search." These are words that other people who did similar
searches have included. Selected results:

            News Quiz: irony,
Canada

            
               Our
Targets
            

            Bill Clinton: disgusted, castration

            Congress: indecent

            Strom Thurmond: cowed, mobbed

            Strom Thurmond's ass: crap, missy

            Rudolph Giuliani: revitalizing

            Bill Gates: billionaire, richest, wealth, hell

            Michael Kinsley: exhilarating, lewd

            Jews: pogroms, nazis, haman

            Christians: persecution, persecutions,
persecuted

            Scientology: successes

            New York: giants

            California: crackle

            Canada: curling

            
               Us
            

            Randy Cohen: wormwood

            Larry Amaros: lazily

            Alex Balk: unoccupied

            Adam Bonin: eve

            Tim Carvell: somatosensory

            Greg Diamond: clarity

            Marshall Efron: anger

            David Finkle: philistines

            Bill Franzen: jail

            Molly Shearer Gabel: gobble

            Leslie Goodman-Malamuth: phonics

            Ananda Gupta: blissful

            Jon Hotchkiss: kitch [sic]

            Chris Kelley: flake

            Joydip Kundu: erupting

            Barbara Lippert: santa

            Noah Meyerson: fowl

            Jennifer Miller: love

            Norman Oder: intern

            Jim O'Grady: earthworm

            Alfa-Betty Olson: calliope

            Katha Pollitt: moralistic

            Sophie Pollitt-Cohen: prolife [does mom know?]

            Daniel Radosh: rusty

            David Rakoff: smote

            Carrie Rickey: thinks

            Nell Scovell: immersing

            Beth Sherman: savoring

            Andrew Silow-Carroll: devotion

            Steve Smith: liberator

            Andrew Staples: envelope

            Deb Stavin: decay

            Matt Sullivan: operas

            Colleen Werthmann: schnauzer

            Kate Wing: bombshell

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Ken Starr

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will 
               become the property of

               
                  Slate
                
               and will be published at

               
                  Slate
               
               's discretion.

               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its site in
connection with your submission .

         
      
   
