
   
   
      
         
            

            
The House
endorsed sending U.S. troops to Kosovo . The nonbinding resolution
backing President Clinton's plan to assign 4,000 soldiers to a peacekeeping
force passed 219-191. Forty-four Republicans, including House Speaker Dennis
Hastert, R-Ill., joined Democrats in support. Many Republicans argued that
Clinton can't be trusted to bring the troops home on time. Democrats accused
Republicans of playing politics and undermining American unity in foreign
policy. Clinton's old spin: The House shouldn't endanger the peace talks by
debating the troops issue. Clinton's new spin: The "bipartisan" House vote
"confirms the strong commitment of the United States." The half-cynical spin:
Clinton will fail to fulfill the conditions the House placed on its approval (a
timetable for the troops' return; that Clinton will explain to the nation why
the troops were sent; that the troops will report to American commanders only).
The completely cynical spin: The Serbs and Albanians will kill the peace deal,
and the House will withdraw its support for sending the troops.
(3/12/99)
            

            
Independent
Counsel Kenneth Starr invited the Justice Department to investigate his
spokesman for leaking and lying to investigators. The spokesman, Charles
Bakaly, says he's innocent but will resign. Background: After the New York
Times reported Jan. 31 that Starr thought he could indict a sitting
president, Starr launched an internal probe. In that probe, Bakaly denied to
Starr's FBI agents that he was the Times ' source. Now that the probe has
found evidence contradicting Bakaly's denial, Starr is referring his findings
to the Justice Department. The Washington Post calls this "an implicit
admission that [Starr] suspects serious wrongdoing on his own staff." The
spins: 1) This proves Starr is a vicious leaker. 2) This proves Starr won't
tolerate vicious leaking. Best tidbit: The Times says Starr's new
spokeswoman "did not return a telephone call seeking comment on Thursday's
developments." (3/12/99)
            

            

               Elizabeth 
               Dole launched her presidential
campaign exploratory committee. Pundits slotted her as the GOP field's
runner-up, trailing Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Dole staged her announcement
with ordinary people, in implicit contrast to Bush's campaign launch days
earlier. Together, their announcements sandwiched the candidacy kickoff of
ex-Gov. Lamar Alexander, R-Tenn. The positive spins on Dole: 1) She's the first
serious female candidate for president. 2) She's a public servant but not a
politician. 3) She'll restore "civility" to politics. 4) She'll listen to
voters rather than dictate her views. 5) She's attractive to Democrats and
independents. 6) She's attractive to women. The negative spins: 1) She's too
tightly wound to handle the campaign trail's surprises. 2) She's too tightly
wound to handle the press. 3) She's too tightly wound to handle criticism. 4)
Her views are vague and mushy. 5) Nothing is more political than a politician
who pretends not to be one. (3/12/99)
            

            
Reports indicate
that China obtained atomic secrets from a U.S. nuclear lab and may have
used them to vastly improve its nuclear missiles. Republicans and the media
demand to know why U.S. security was lax and why the Clinton administration
didn't recognize, admit, or aggressively investigate the problem when the first
signs of trouble appeared in 1995. The White House says it got wind of the
problem in 1997 and responded promptly. Republicans plan to hold a hearing. The
spins: 1) Clinton didn't want to believe there was a problem because he knew it
would disrupt his policy of constructive engagement. 2) He knew there was a
problem but hid it anyway. 3) He hid the problem so it wouldn't stop him from
helping U.S. companies sell technology to China under the guise of constructive
engagement. 4) He hid the problem so it wouldn't stop him from being nice to
China in exchange for 1996 campaign contributions. 5) Republicans are blaming
Clinton in order to hide similarly lax security under Presidents Reagan and
Bush. (3/10/99)
            

            

               RJR
Nabisco 
               is breaking up . Nabisco will jettison the company's
tobacco interests and will sell its foreign cigarette business to Japan Tobacco
to shore up the severed domestic unit, known as R.J. Reynolds Tobacco. The
media spun the story in two directions with two different villains. Story 1 is
about the excesses of the leveraged buyout era--exemplified by the RJR Nabisco
merger--and the comeuppance of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co., which saddled
the merged firm with unbearable debt. Story 2 is about the rise of tobacco
litigation and regulation and the gradual financial buckling of evil cigarette
companies. The convergence story is that RJR merged with Nabisco in the hope of
escaping its "tobacco taint" but found instead that the taint simply spread to
Nabisco. (3/10/99)
            

            

               Joe 
               DiMaggio died of complications from lung
cancer surgery. News accounts recited his résumé--the Hall of Fame, nine World
Series championships, 11 All-Star games, and three American League Most
Valuable Player awards--but focused on his record 56 game hitting steak in
1941, which still stands today. While sports analysts compared his greatness on
the field with that of Babe Ruth and Lou Gehrig, commentators traced his
celebrity to his courteous, humble, all-American, son-of-immigrants
personality. The spins: 1) DiMaggio represented the grace and dignity of the
good old days. 2) Ruth and Ty Cobb represented the pugnacity and decadence of
the good old days, and DiMaggio was the exception. (3/8/99)
            

            
Gov. George
W. Bush , R-Texas, announced he is forming a presidential campaign
exploratory committee. Though he won't officially declare his candidacy until
June, he paraded notable supporters such as former GOP Chairman Haley Barbour
and House GOP Chairman J.C. Watts Jr. before the press. His aides also listed
scores of governors and members of Congress who are backing him. Everyone
agrees his strategy is to create an air of inevitability and suffocate his
competitors. The spins against him: 1) He's inexperienced in public office. 2)
He's inexperienced in national politics. 3) He has no base. 4) He lacks
organization in early states. 5) He's had it too easy and is due for a fall. 6)
His expectations are too high. 7) Elizabeth Dole's entry into the race will
kill his momentum. 8) His supporters don't know what he stands for. 9) He
doesn't know what he stands for. (3/8/99)
            

            
Film director
Stanley Kubrick died . Obituaries recalled his movies' eight Academy
Awards, focusing on Dr. Strangelove , A Clockwork Orange , and
2001: A Space Odyssey , also mentioning Lolita and The
Shining . Commentators debated the significance of the bleak fantasies in
which he portrayed human recklessness, madness, brutality, murder, and nuclear
holocaust. The half-cynical spin: He hated people and portrayed them as
savages. The completely cynical spin: He hated people and portrayed them as
savages because they deserved it. (3/8/99)
            

         
      
   
