
   
   
      
         
            No. 231: &quot;Ultracolossal&quot;

            

               An announcement Sunday roiled the world of the superjumbo. Who plans to
do what?
            

             

            by noon
ET Tuesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's Question
(No. 230)--"Whoooo's Johnny":
            

            

               
                  
                     "Johnny has been such an effective spokesperson for us
because he truly believes in the power of our products," says the president of
New Jersey's Franklin Electronics. Who is endorsing
what?
                  
               
            

            
"Johnnie Cochran endorsing open-source software. 'If they share the code, you
must download!' "-- Dee Lacey ( Kathy Kreutzer had a similar
answer.)

            "John
Travolta for the Franklin Stayin' Alive Digital Fever Thermometer."-- Molly
Shearer Gabel
            

            
"Perhaps someone should inform Franklin Electronics that, contrary to what they
might expect, having John Wayne Gacy endorse your clown-makeup line is a bad
call."-- Tim Carvell
            

            "I have
no idea, which seems to cast doubt on the theory that he's such an effective
spokesman."-- Heather Harmon
            

            "Johnny
Cash narrates Franklin's electronic Holy Bibles. Willie Nelson's slated to
voice their new 'Talking Talmud.' "-- Beth Sherman
            

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Self-Reference Wrap-Up
            

            To our youngest players, the title of Thursday's
question may be as ancient and obscure as Edgar Bergen's wacky catch phrase:
"I'm a ventriloquist on the radio, suckers!" or Pedro's "S'all right." Ah,
Pedro, Pedro, Pedro. In last Wednesday's New York Times , Richard Severo
remembered: "Originally, Pedro had a body that was crushed in a train wreck
near Chicago. Se単or Wences, salvaging the head, put it in a box. At first,
those who booked the act resisted; they did not think people would relate to a
head in a box. Se単or Wences prevailed and Pedro proved almost as big a hit as
Johnny." Not Heeere's Johnny. Not quiz question Johnny. This Johnny was just a
wig and a smear of lipstick on a clenched fist, but he made Se単or Wences that
rarest of performers, a genuinely funny ventriloquist. Se単or Wences died last
Tuesday at age 103.

            Some other Johnnies
neglected by quiz participants--Johnny Angel (Shelley Fabares), Johnny One Note
(Rodgers and Hart), Johnny Too Bad (a swell song from The Harder They
Come ), and this line of dialogue from the 1959 racially charged English
murder mystery Sapphire , spoken, if I recall correctly, by Horace Big
Cigar (Robert Adams): "We got plenty Johnnies, boss." Indeed we do.

            
               Johnny on the Spot
Answer
            

            Johnny Cash is endorsing
computer bibles. And he's not just a pitchman; he's a user. He's also in on the
manufacturing: The man in black narrates the desktop version of the King James
Bible, scheduled for a July release.

            
               Death With Dignity
Extra
            

            A published photograph of
Joe DiMaggio's memorial service last Friday in St. Patrick's Cathedral shows
Rudolph Giuliani seated next to Henry Kissinger. Despite the crude color
reproduction used by the Times , you can actually see the cloud of pure
evil hanging over these two men. (Or is that Phil Rizzuto's head?) Right behind
them you can just make out a portal opening up to hell, presumably for the
arrival of George Steinbrenner.

            Deeply reverential fun facts:

            

               Dr. Rock Positano, organizer of the day's events, was DiMaggio's foot
doctor. He has also treated the feet of Mort Zuckerman, Giuliani, and
Kissinger.

               The post-mourning brunch was held at Le Cirque 2000. Few could eat through
their grief. If by "few" you mean "all."

               Steinbrenner said his conversation with brunch partner Kissinger was
"better than my four years at Williams. But I didn't know any mass murderers at
Williams." If by "said" you exclude the final sentence.

               Did I make that clear? He's held the naked feet of Zuckerman, Giuliani, and
Kissinger. Disgusting yet biblical yet disgusting.

            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Johnny Carson's inadequate circulatory system.

         
      
   
