
   
   
      
         
            Paper Swoon

            As a striving free-lancer,
I believe in the three note theory of success: i.e., send three flattering
missives to the right people each day, and you'll be at the top in no time. It
doesn't really matter what you write--but what you write on does matter.
Stationery has always been important, but paper's cachet as a cultural
signifier has increased dramatically in the age of e-mail. While friends don't
care if you send them letters on recycled grocery bags, those who don't know
you will scrutinize the note--the paper, the letterhead--and judge you.

            Cognizant of the perils
of purchasing stationery, I start at the top, Cartier--arguably the snootiest
stationer around. At the desk of the 52 nd Street store in Manhattan,
I find a stern saleswoman at the desk taking an order from "Mr. Ambassador" on
the phone. She hangs up, looks at her watch, and says she can give me about 10
minutes--until the next ambassador, I guess. The first stationery she shows me
is 32 pound (meaning that 500 stacked sheets of it will weigh that much). The
sheet is thick enough to choke a Hewlett-Packard, which is the point, of
course. It's the preferred weight for writing paper, the maximum recommended
for laser printers is 28 pound.

            Before we discuss paper price, she informs me that the name
and address die to engrave the stationery will cost $130. A little steep, I
suggest. A die that includes a family crest is closer to $1,000, she says
crisply, "and people enjoy leaving their address dies to others in their
wills."

            We whip through some
options--envelopes lined with tissue, beveling or indenting the sheet around
the edge to create a border, stamping the family crest in gold--before we
return to paper prices: Fifty ecru, note-sized sheets and matching envelopes go
for $254, engraving included. (That's about $5 a note.) The price for 50
business-sized sheets and envelopes is $259.50, and 50 6 inch by 4 inch note
cards and envelopes cost $256.

            My fingers glide across the soft paper like skates on a
pond. And then the saleswoman lets it slip: Cartier's paper is actually Crane's
32 pound paper.

            Stephen Crane made the paper for the first colonial
bank notes back in 1776; Paul Revere did the engraving. Those new 20s in your
wallet with the Andrew Jackson watermark are Crane & Co.'s handiwork. In
addition to the U.S. Mint and the treasuries of 40 other countries, Crane
supplies paper for about 3,000 retail stationers in the United States. The
locations of Crane & Co.'s 13 outlets can be found on the firm's
Web site, and another page lets you search by ZIP code or international region for other retailers.
(A Greenwich, Conn., calligrapher tells me that Tiffany & Co. also
repackages Crane's paper.)

            "Most of our social
stationery is 32 pound, 100 percent cotton rag," says Leslie Reed, Crane's
manager of personal products. Cotton's long fibers are what make paper soft. In
the old days, all paper was made of cotton rags, hence the name. Today, most
writing paper is made of 25 percent cotton and 75 percent wood pulp. The
problem with wood pulp is that paper makers have to use acid to break it
down--and the chemical never quits working. This explains why recently printed,
cheaply made books are self-immolating in the Library of Congress, while
500-year-old Gutenberg Bibles are OK.

            Some paperphiles buy foreign stationery made by Smythson of
Bond Street, London, or by Pineider of Florence, Italy. Smythsons outlets can
be traced via a toll-free number, (800) 345-6839. The saleswoman at Blacker and
Kooby, on 87 th and Madison, shows me some Smythson sheets and
envelopes, offering that it is the paper of choice of the British royal family.
Beautiful and very "U," as Nancy Mitford would say, but almost U in that hounds
and blood sausage way. A little rumply--the cards don't quite match the
envelopes.

            Then she opens a green
leather case, revealing Pineider samples. It made me believe, as some
scientists contend, that the beauty response is hard-wired. The paper is both
languid and luminous, and it feels denser than Crane's. But the 225-year-old
Italian stationers don't bother with weight standards, used for currency and
book paper, because this stuff is strictly for letter writing. It is, they say,
the smoothest possible writing surface you can find. It would be a crime to use
anything other than a good fountain pen on it. But which pen? That's a research
project unto itself.

            The sheets are creamy white and the tissue lining in the
envelope a bluer white. The saleswoman didn't have to drop names (the pope and
Stevie Wonder) to justify the price of 75 note-sized sheets and envelopes. At
$144 ($1.92 per note), this stationery is a steal. But the engraving cost is a
steep $175 and $42 for the die plate. You can find Pineider outlets by calling
(800) 616-9111.

            I stop by Kanter's Printers on 23 rd
Street, an address generated by the Crane Web site. Kanter's price for 100
note-sized sheets and envelopes on Crane's paper is $166 ($1.66 a note!), about
$100 if I use Strathmore, a competing paper, which is only 25 percent cotton
rag.

            To get the stationery
engraved, the die plate will cost $56, about average. It is a onetime charge,
and Kanter's--and most other stores--let you keep the plates. But if I forego
the luxury of engraving, the clerk will sell me 500 24 pound Strathmore sheets
and envelopes, flat printed, for $167. (That's 33 cents a note. Now we're
really talking.) Turnaround time for printing is 10 days, about a month faster
than either Smythson or Pineider.

            If you're not going Europaper, the mom and pop operations
are definitely the best value. Is engraved paper really worth it? I ask the
printer. "Some people want a Caddy and others want a Chevy," he shrugs. "Does
anyone use colored paper?" "Hairdressers and discos."

            After choosing paper, you
must pick a size. Business-sized sheets are a mistake for two reasons: 1) it's
difficult to write enough to fill that much space; and 2) that much flattery
might be misinterpreted as stalking. The note-sized sheets look insubstantial
and girlie. The 6 by 4 cards are best because they make a few scribbles look
weighty and dignified.

            Luckily, there are only three sizes of fine stationery,
because there are hundreds of typefaces from which to compose your letterhead.
At stationery shops you see people agonizing over whether they're really more
Helvetica than Old Roman. The sample books don't help much because you want to
see how it looks in your name on the size sheet you've chosen. Some Crane &
Co. outlets let you test drive a sample of typefaces on a computer. The
Levenger Web site, which sells Crane's, limits you to four
sensible choices, so you can't go too far wrong. Most professional printers
will do a proof of your letterhead for $12-$25.

            Let me offer one piece of advice: Avoid monograms.
Those three initials may look aristocratic, but that's because they were first
used by drunken, illiterate royals who couldn't write their whole names. I
wonder if Tom Wolfe knows that? His writing paper has a large blue, diamond
shaped monogram at the top. But then, he doesn't need to observe the three note
theory anymore.

         
      
   
