
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  The
Matrix
                (Warner Bros.). Keanu Reeves stars in this complex,
dystopic sci-fi thriller. Critics give high marks to the computer-enhanced
special effects but are divided on the merits of the ambitious plot and the
everything-but-the-kichen-sink filmic provenance, from Soylent Green to
Terminator 2 to Hong Kong actioners. For some the effects are enough:
It's "one big, fat, honking comic book of a sci-fi-martial-arts adventure
flick. ... It has stu-freakin'-pendous special effects, hipster sang-froid out
the wazoo and a story line that makes only as much sense as it has to" (Michael
O'Sullivan, the Washington Post ). A grudgingly appreciative Janet Maslin
says that at its best the movie brings "Hong Kong action style home to
audiences in a mainstream American adventure with big prospects as a cult
classic and with the future very much in mind" (the New York Times ).
Others criticize the convoluted story line and call it strictly genre and
strictly for "guys in their teens and 20s, for whom the script's pretentious
mumbo-jumbo of undergraduate mythology, religious mysticism and technobabble
could even be a plus rather than a dramatic liability" (Todd McCarthy, Daily
Variety ). (To see the trailer and some fine Keanu pics, visit this fan
site; check out
David Edelstein's in 
                  Slate
               .)

            
               
                  10 Things I
Hate About You
                (Buena Vista Pictures). Critics, many of whom
admitted they had been gearing up for "10 things I hate about this movie"
reviews, are charmed, if not in love with this week's Shakespeare offering.
(The source is The Taming of the Shrew .) Entertainment Weekly 's
Owen Gleiberman writes it "may be the cheekiest 'literary' update yet--a
post-riot grrrl gloss" of the play. Many gush over the foxy young star, Julia
Stiles. Complaints are mainly a result of critics'
upscale-high-school-caper-film fatigue. A few find the film irritating:
Daily Variety 's Dennis Harvey says, "it lurches all over the map,
encompassing dialogue both inspired and juvenile." (Visit the
official site.)

            
               
                  Cookie's
Fortune
                (October Films). Critical response to Robert Altman's
warm 'n' fuzzy Southern Gothic tale covers the spectrum. Most are tickled pink:
"a small miracle" with "an irresistibly companionable spirit" (David Denby,
The New Yorker ). The classic Altman deep bench (including Patricia Neal,
Glenn Close, Julianne Moore, Chris O'Donnell, and Liv Tyler) does not
disappoint, and most play twinklingly kooky oddballs. However, several critics
are not so keen. More than one call it "Altman lite" (Jack Mathews, the
Daily News ) and say "[t]he fabled Altman atmosphere fails to jell"
(Gleiberman, Entertainment Weekly ). A small cadre is seriously
disappointed: "another footnote to an Altman career that is fast becoming all
footnotes" (Richard Corliss, Time ) or, more simply, "[h]e falters again"
(Stanley Kauffmann, the New Republic ). (For more on director Robert
Altman, visit this site, which has links to interviews and essays about him, and
read Edelstein's review Friday in 
                  Slate
               .)

            
               
                  A Walk on
the Moon
                (Miramax Films). Mixed reviews, tending toward the
negative, for this tale of sexual liberation set in 1969. A 32-year-old Jewish
housewife who married too young is on vacation in the Catskills with her two
kids and mother-in-law when she meets a sexy, young blouse peddler. The rest?
As the Chicago Sun-Times ' Roger Ebert says, it's "one small step for the
Blouse Man, a giant leap for Pearl Kantrowitz." Time 's Corliss writes
that the film's nice, if "you look past the gaffes and clichés." On the
positive side, most say the acting is great, and though the film "doesn't take
enormous chances," it is nevertheless "extremely satisfying" (Denby, The New
Yorker ). 
                  Slate
               's Edelstein is more positive than
most, praising the "deliciously resonant dual setting: a Catskills summer
community to which middle-class Jews from the city migrate to swim and eat and
play mah-jongg, and the gathering hippies at nearby Woodstock." ( the rest of
his review.)

            
               
                  The
Out-of-Towners
                (Paramount Pictures). Goldie Hawn and Steve Martin
star in a remake of Neil Simon's 1970 film that's "so feeble and unfocussed as
to make the Farrelly brothers of There's Something About Mary appear to
have suckled at the bosom of Aristophanes" (Lawrence Van Gelder, the New
York Times ). All critics agree; few put it so well. The plot: A nice
Midwestern couple goes through the wringer in Manhattan (lost luggage,
muggings, etc). The film's only breath of fresh air is John Cleese, who plays a
snobby hotel manager, recycling Basil Fawlty to good effect. (For more on
Martin, check out this site.)

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  Morgan:
American Financier
               , by Jean Strouse (Random House). Excellent
reviews for this doorstop-sized biography on the legendary financier: "a
magnificent, insightful study" (Maury Klein, the Wall Street Journal ).
Reviewers are impressed by Strouse's extensive research, which turned up a
truckload of new details on Morgan's life and, more importantly, by the
balanced portrait that she provides of a man whose biographies have to date
been colored by vindictive accounts from contemporaries with axes to grind. The
strongest negative comment comes from the New York Times Book Review ,
which warns that "readers without an interest in business and financial history
may find some of this material wearisome" (Richard Lingeman). (To buy the book
click here.)

            
               
                  The Times of
My Life and My Life With the Times , by Max Frankel (Random
House). Decent reviews for former New York Times executive editor Max
Frankel's memoirs: Ward Just calls it a "a smart, tough, scrupulous book" in
the New York Times Book Review ; in that fair journal's traditional
negative-comment spot (the penultimate paragraph) all Just can come up with is
that there's "a whiff of the puritan about Max Frankel, and perhaps also the
rustle of score-settling." Some reviewers note that his personal life--if you
can even say he had one--gets short shrift, and most say Frankel's time at the
helm is not half as interesting as his flight from Germany in his childhood and
his days as a young correspondent. Perhaps the best backhanded compliment is
provided by another New York Times review, this one from the daily
paper: Richard Kluger writes that the book has "only occasional spasms of the
immodesty that almost by definition infects all who venture into
autobiography." (To buy the book click here.)

            Find a
movie playing near you on Sidewalk.com.

            

               Recent "Summary Judgment" columns
            

             

            

               
                  Movie -- Mod Squad ;

               
                  Movie -- EdTV ;

               
                  Movie -- 20 Dates ;

               
                  Television -- Futurama ;

               
                  Book -- All Too Human: A Political Education , by
George Stephanopoulos;

               
                  Book -- For the Relief of Unbearable Urges , by Nathan
Englander.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  True Crime ;

               
                  Movie -- The King and I ;

               
                  Movie -- Forces of Nature ;

               
                  Television--
                  The Oscars ;

               
                  Book--
                  Years of Renewal , by Henry Kissinger.

            

             

            

               
                  
                     Movie--
                  
                  The
Deep End of the Ocean ;

               
                  Movie--
                  The
Corruptor ;

               
                  Movie--
                  The Rage: Carrie
2 ;

               
                  Movie--
                  Wing
Commander ;

               
                  Death-- Stanley Kubrick;

               
                  Book--
                  Black Hawk Down: A
Story of Modern War , by Mark Bowden.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie -- Analyze This ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Cruel Intentions ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Lock, Stock & Two Smoking
Barrels ;

               
                  Book -- Monica's Story , by Andrew Morton;

               
                  Theater -- Annie Get Your Gun ;

               
                  Theater -- Bright Lights, Big
City .

            

         
      
   
