
   
   
      
         
            The Wimps Are Winning

            
Italy's advocacy of a three-day bombing pause in the Kosovo conflict was
getting much attention in Europe Friday. Germany's Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung
and El País of
Madrid both led with it, Die
Welt reported progress in negotiations about it, and in London the
Daily Telegraph said on its front page that NATO leaders were
"seriously considering" it. The idea, proposed by Italian Prime Minister
Massimo D'Alema, is that the bombing should stop as soon as a U.N. Security
Council resolution on a Kosovo settlement is drafted (rather than approved) so
as to avoid a Chinese veto. The airstrikes would stop before President Slobodan
Milosevic withdrew any of his 40,000 troops from Kosovo--perhaps even before he
formally agreed to do so.

            It
seemed like a good day for the wimps, but other European papers--including the
Independent
of London and El
Mundo of Madrid--highlighted NATO divisions over the Italian plan. The
Independent said the United States and Britain will "oppose fiercely"
any plan for a pause in the air war. The British press also reported tension
between NATO's closest buddies, President Clinton and British Prime Minister
Tony Blair. The Guardian led its front page with the headline "Clinton clash
with Blair." This was based on some U.S. press reports that the president told
Blair in an "unusually difficult" telephone conversation Tuesday that he must
"get control" of people spreading the impression that the two of them are not
getting on. There have been a number of articles in British newspapers this
week about supposed differences between them, especially over the issue of
ground troops.

            The
other most popular Kosovo angle in Europe Friday was the first large-scale
desertions by Serb troops. This received front-page treatment in Le Monde of Paris, but the
Times of
London tempered the excitement with a big headline saying that the Serb army in
Kosovo is "as strong as ever." Quoting British defense ministry sources, the
Times said that despite reports of up to 1,000 Serb soldiers deserting,
"the size of the military presence in Kosovo remains at about 40,000, the same
as when the air campaign began." It saw this as a blow for those within NATO
who hope that the fight will have gone out of the Serb army by autumn.

            There
was, however, a rare suggestion by an independent British commentator that the
air war might actually be working. Preparing to eat humble pie, military
historian John Keegan, writing in the Daily Telegraph , of which he is
defense editor, said the desertions and reports of anti-war protests in Serb
provincial towns are "the first indication that the Serbian President's hold
over his people may be loosening." He said the "strategic community" on both
sides of the Atlantic may have been wrong in relying on historical precedent to
pooh-pooh the idea of victory by air power alone. They may also have underrated
the new technology because "no self-standing air campaign has ever before been
mounted with precision weapons." Keegan said Milosevic's main mistake may have
been to send barely trained teen-age conscripts to Kosovo, since their morale
is especially vulnerable. "Yet those who direct the war, if it comes right,
will still not have a proper reason to congratulate themselves," he wrote. "If
it is emerging that this is a war of morale--that of the conscripts'
willingness to bear fear versus the NATO public's patience with apparent lack
of results--President Clinton and the Prime Minister should now accept that
they have paid insufficient attention to supporting the morale of their own
electorates and have been insufficiently calculating in attacking that of their
enemy."

            For
the Italian press Friday, Kosovo developments paled in significance beside a
feared revival of home-grown terrorism. All the main Italian papers led on the
murder of Professor Massimo D'Antona, a consultant to Italy's labor minister,
who was shot outside his home in Rome Thursday by two young men in jeans and
denim jackets. A document purporting to come from the Red Brigades, a guerrilla
group thought to have been eliminated, later claimed responsibility for the
killing. All the Italian papers gloomily recalled the Red Brigades' bomb
outrages and assassinations of earlier years, but La Stampa of Turin said in a
front-page comment that there is an important difference now. Italy has a new
ruling class and a new president, "the country has leadership," it said.

            In an interview Thursday
with Yediot Aharanot , Israel's new prime minister, Labor Party leader
Ehud Barak, thanked Tony Blair for showing him the way to his election victory.
"Blair got the [British] Labor leadership when that party was in a similar
situation to the [Israeli] Labor Party," Barak said. "He told me that the
accepted premise in the party was that they must lose elections. They lost for
16 years and got used to it. Blair insisted on finding out why they really
lost, and in this way arrived at a victorious campaign."

         
      
   
