
   
   
      
         
             Kosovo Con Games

            For
weeks, critics of the war in Yugoslavia have pronounced it unwinnable. The
atrocities continue unabated , they say. Air power alone will never get
the job done. It's another Vietnam. President Clinton has blown it. Everything
we do makes the situation worse. Whether Clinton and his allies can win the
war remains to be seen. But one thing is certain: They can't win the
debate over the war as long as critics are allowed to rig it with the
following hidden premises:

            
               A. Selective
Scrutiny
            

            
               1. Policies. Critics observe that
many things have gone badly since the air war began: Ethnic Albanians have been
killed and expelled from Kosovo and anti-American nationalism has grown in
Russia. It's easy to associate bad outcomes with the current policy. But
critics seldom apply the same kind of scrutiny to alternative policies. If NATO
had forsworn the use of force against the Serbs, what would the Serbs
ultimately have done to the Kosovar Albanians? If NATO had launched a ground
war, what would Russia be doing now? If, as critics observe, the Serbs have
managed to cleanse Kosovo in less than four weeks, what difference could NATO
have made by beginning a ground force buildup (which takes considerable time) a
month ago?

            
               2. Policy-makers. American
reporters think their job is to examine U.S. policy-makers not foreign
policy-makers. So they discount Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic's
behavior as an objective consequence of Clinton's subjective decisions. When
Serbian ethnic cleansing follows NATO bombing, reporters treat the Serbian
action not as the product of free will but as a reaction determined by NATO's
action. So while journalists on the ground report on Serbian atrocities,
journalists in the studios and the newsrooms in effect pass the blame to NATO
and Clinton.

            This bias has produced a bizarre
blame-America-first spin on the right. "We have ignited the very human rights
catastrophe the war was started to avoid," declared Pat Buchanan on Face the
Nation . Columnist Arianna Huffington compared Kosovo to Waco, arguing that
just as Clinton's actions six years ago "precipitated" the murder-suicides by
the Branch Davidian cult in Waco, Texas, his intervention in Kosovo "has
unwittingly produced one of the great humanitarian catastrophes of the
20 th century." While some conservatives allege that Clinton's
unnecessary belligerence provoked the Serbs to ethnic cleansing, others say his
timidity about using ground troops "emboldened" the Serbs to the same effect.
Clinton even gets the blame for Russian hostility. On Meet the Press ,
Sen. Judd Gregg, R-N.H., accused Clinton of "pushing Russia into a corner and
putting them in a position where they're no longer able to do anything but to
react in an aggressive way towards our action."

            
               3. Moral
actors. When the Serbs butcher another 50 Kosovar Albanians or drive
another 100,000 out of Kosovo, it's a dog-bites-man story. When NATO bombs what
it thought was a military convoy and instead hits a caravan of civilian
refugees, killing scores, it's a man-bites-dog story. For several days, the
media treated the casualties caused by NATO as the lead story from Kosovo,
overshadowing far greater casualties caused during that time by the Serbs.
"This may have cost NATO the moral high ground," declared John McLaughlin,
invoking the moral-equivalence formula usually despised by conservatives.
Meanwhile, the Serbs' role in pushing the refugees onto the road in the middle
of a war zone was scarcely mentioned.

            
               B. Sleight-of-Hand
Inferences
            

            
               4. Unachieved to unachievable.
Today's media report news instantaneously and expect it to be made
instantaneously as well. In less than two weeks, their verdict on the bombing
of Yugoslavia leapt from unfulfilled objectives to failure to impossibility.
Since air power hasn't brought the Serbs to their knees in four weeks, the
media conclude that it never will. Congressional Republicans have decided it's
"doomed to failure," according to Fred Barnes. Never mind that under NATO's
plan, the bombing will become more severe each week.

            
               5. Vietnam to Kosovo. Critics
constantly compare Kosovo to Vietnam. They infer two lessons from Vietnam: that
"gradual escalation" never works and that "bombing" can't break an enemy's
will. The trick in invoking such analogies is to ignore the differences: that
the war in Kosovo is being waged by 19 countries against one; that no
superpower is willing to prop up the targeted country; and that today's air
power and surveillance are vastly more precise than the "bombing" technology
used in Vietnam.

            
               6. Sinner to
sin. Critics on the right argue that because Clinton is untrustworthy,
so is the war. As George Will put it last week, the contempt of court citation
against Clinton for falsely denying his affair with Monica Lewinsky is "a
timely reminder of the mendacity that drenches his presidency, including his
Balkan policy." Meanwhile, critics on the left argue that because the United
States failed to intervene in Rwanda, its intervention in Kosovo is morally
suspect and probably racist.

            
               C. Hidden
Dichotomies
            

            
               7. Empirical/moral. Centuries ago,
scientific philosophers invented a strict separation between talking about the
way the world is and talking about the way it ought to be. Today's media,
following this premise, separate "editorial" from "news" judgments. The only
standard by which "news" organizations feel comfortable evaluating a policy is
success or failure, not right or wrong. So the media's consensus about Kosovo
is that NATO's policy is "not working." As Tim Russert put it to Deputy
Secretary of State Strobe Talbott on Meet the Press , "The atrocities
continue. What success can you point to that any of your strategy has worked?"
The alternative perspective goes overlooked: that the question is what NATO
must do, that atrocities are a challenge rather than a verdict, and that
NATO should persevere precisely because they continue.

            
               8. Political/military. Critics say
Clinton should have destroyed Serbian TV networks by now and never should have
sworn off ground troops. They deride these as "political decisions" and mock
NATO for refusing to bomb Milosevic's palace because it contains cultural
treasures, including a Rembrandt. "The idea that Italy and Greece object to
ground troops and therefore we shouldn't do what is necessary to win this war,
is, in my view, ridiculous," protested Bill Kristol on This Week . But
what's the definition of winning? Clinton and other NATO leaders say they're
not just seeking a one-time victory over Milosevic. They're trying to develop
what is essentially an international policing consortium. This is a political
as well as military project. It entails compromising with allies who are more
cautious about applying force and authorizing targets. Otherwise, the United
States would have to police the world alone, which is unsustainable politically
(thanks in part to vociferous opposition from many of these same critics), not
to mention militarily.

            
               9. Harm/help. Skeptics maintain
that the bombing isn't helping the Kosovars. "I don't care about dropping any
more bridges into the Danube River," Buchanan fumed on Face the Nation .
"I don't know how that helps those people" in Kosovo. The question, he argued,
should be "What is the best way to help these people and save these lives? Not
how we can bomb another oil plant or oil refinery." Minutes later, host Bob
Schieffer ended the show by noting that the Kosovars were still being purged
and asking "whether what we are doing is doing any good."

            This dichotomy rules out
the fallback strategy that NATO and U.S. officials have articulated from the
outset: to make the cost of Milosevic's "victory" outweigh the rewards.
Conservatives used to defend this concept (which they called "deterrence") when
it was preached and practiced by President Reagan. If the punishment you
administer to the current troublemaker fails to stop him, the theory goes, at
least it will make the next troublemaker think twice.

            
               D. Self-Fulfilling
Doubts
            

            
               10. Practical futility. The
pundits' verdict is in: The war is "doomed" and "already lost." On Late
Edition , Wolf Blitzer observed that Milosevic "doesn't give, after a month
of this, any impression that he is backing down." Quoting a report that U.S.
military leaders see no sign "that Milosevic is changing his strategy or about
to break," Russert asked Talbott, "Are we losing this war?" Other talking heads
asserted that NATO is "not united" and won't be able to "stand up" as the
conflict wears on. "Time is not on our side," warned former National Security
Adviser Brent Scowcroft on Late Edition . "It is going to be very
difficult to keep the alliance together."

            Of course, the best way to assure that Milosevic
doesn't break, that NATO comes apart, and that the United States loses the war
is to predict that Milosevic won't break, that NATO will come apart, and that
the United States will lose the war. These predictions bolster the Serbs'
morale while undermining NATO's. As Sen. Chris Dodd, D-Conn., observed on
Face the Nation , "Patience and resolve are as important a weapon today
as actually the airstrikes are."

            
               11. Moral authority. Rather than
call Clinton a liar, many pundits pass this off as a widespread perception by
others. They call it a "moral authority" and "public relations" problem, asking
how it will "impact" his "ability to lead" Americans and NATO in war. "There is
a common drum beat on the airwaves," a reporter asked Clinton on April 15,
"that you, personally, lack the moral authority to be commander in chief."
New York Times columnist Maureen Dowd warned that Clinton "does not
inspire" great "loyalty," adding, "He may have a conflict of interest if he
sends in ground troops. It would be hard to save his skin and their skin at the
same time." By questioning Clinton's moral authority in this pseudo-objective
way, journalists destroy what's left of his moral authority.

            
               12. NATO credibility. Self-styled
hawks fret that NATO will lose the war and thereby expose its impotence. This
"lumbering and clumsy" alliance, incapable of "managing such brush fires as
Kosovo," could "lose the Kosovo war in a month against the ruin of a rump
state," warned columnist Charles Krauthammer. "If the perception is that for 26
days tiny little Yugoslavia ... has withstood NATO and the United States,"
asked Russert, will NATO and the United States be exposed as "a paper tiger"?
Russert's guest, Sen. Richard Lugar, R-Ind., grimly intoned, "Many are
predicting that this will be the funeral of NATO." And all because, in
Krauthammer's words, Clinton "staked the survival of the most successful
alliance in history on bright new academic ideas cooked up far from the
battlefields on which they now flounder."

            Having defined anything
less than the total recapture of Kosovo and the restoration of its refugees as
a failure, Clinton's critics are ensuring that such failure will be interpreted
as catastrophically as possible. As for their suggestion that NATO's
credibility is too precious to be risked in war, you can understand their
reluctance. Even tough guys have their Rembrandt.

         
      
   
