
   
   
      
         
            No. 220: &quot;Sticks and Stones&quot;

            

               The list includes beasts, criminals, villains, thugs, fascist legions,
and hordes of murderers. List of what?
            

            by noon
ET Wednesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Monday's Question
(No. 219)--"Not":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              The slogan in Maine,
promulgated at government expense, is "Not Me, Not Now." Not
what?
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            "Not
Hillel."-- Carrie Rickey ( Tim Carvell and Andrew
Silow-Carroll had similar answers.)

            "Not a
new law that requires women in labor to serve jury duty."-- Adrianne
Tolsch
            

            "Not a
chance in hell former President George Bush will allow blacks, Jews, Mexicans,
Canadians, or homosexuals within five miles of his Kennebunkport summer manse
... unless they are to be used as game."-- Larry Amaros
            

            "Oh,
this is Maine's tourist board, lamely responding to Vermont's campaign,
'Wouldn't You Rather Be in Vermont?' "-- Tim Carvell (similarly, Dale
Shuger )

            
"Maurice? What's that noise? You're not having sex with that lobster, are
you?"-- Chris Kelly
            

             

             

             

             

             

             

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Maine means L.L. Bean,
Stephen King, and the Bush family compound, which is basically Hyannis Port,
Mass., but with unattractive people who aren't having much fun or killing
people in drunken driving incidents, so I guess it's a trade-off. It is cold
there. And they grow lobsters in the rocky soil, between the rows of blueberry
trees that form such an attractive backdrop to Miss Angela Lansbury, star of
television's Baywatch , although you'd think they'd shoot a show like
that someplace warmer. The state seal shows a farmer and a seaman and a moose,
who seems faintly disapproving of the lifestyle of the farmer and the seaman,
which strikes me as impertinent coming from a ruminant. If two people are
happy, where's the harm, Mr. Oh-So-Judgmental Moose! The seal includes a pine
tree symbolizing other pine trees--does that still count as symbolism?--along
with the North Star and the Latin word "Dirigo," which actually means "I
direct," but if you imagine Mel Brooks saying it, sounds like "Dir I Go eating
a lobster which is not even slightly kosher! Like some big dumb moose!"

            
               Abstinent
Answer
            

            "Not Me, Not Now"--not sex. Particularly not teen
sex, particularly not nonmarital sex.

            Maine is one of 48 states--California and New
Hampshire have opted out--spending the $50 million a year Congress allocates
for abstinence education, with every $4 of federal money matched with $3 of
state funds.

            North Carolina now has an official state sex act:
"mutually faithful monogamous heterosexual relationships in the context of
marriage." The state bird is the cardinal; the state flower is dogwood; they're
not even dating.

            Wyoming's theme is "Sex and Reading Can Wait"
(except for the part about the reading).

            Utah, with its own view of the erotic, uses the
money to sponsor a hockey league. "When kids are playing hockey or basketball,"
says Nan Streeter, manager of Utah's reproductive health program, "it's hard
for them to get involved in risky behavior."

            Not to drag in my
personal life, but one thing that's always given me real erotic contentment is
knowing that, while having sex, it's hard for me to get involved in playing
hockey.

            
               Benelux
Extra
            

            A bloated promotional
supplement in today's New York Times touts the lowlands as a great place
to make a buck. Match the advertised attribute with the nation.

            
               National
Characteristic
            

            1. "The four P's" make it a great place to do
business.

            2. Aristotle would find it just the right size.

            3. "Most people ... live below sea level."

            4. "One Thousand Years Young."

            5. National capital transformed "from dour city of
bureaucrats into a magnet for multinationals."

            6. "The Times They Are a' Changing."

            7. "You're constantly
among attractive and amusing people who find you fascinating."

            

               Answers
            

            1. Belgium. The P's are place, people, price,
pro-business, pot-smoking, pouty, pert'n'sassy, and promiscuous. Is that
four?

            2. Luxembourg. The ad notes other attractive, small
things--microchips, squirrels, country music great Brenda Lee (except for the
squirrels and Ms. Lee).

            3. Netherlands. Say no more. I'm sold.

            4. Netherlands. And, coincidentally, Strom
Thurmond.

            5. Belgium. Brussels. And thank goodness all those
dull bureaucrats have been displaced by witty, playful multinational corporate
executives. Let the revels commence.

            6. Luxembourg, apparently, was the old tambourine
man's inspiration. Although oughtn't it be "a-changin' "? Maybe it's different
in Walloon.

            7. Randyland. No, it's
not on any map of the Benelux nations; you have to find it in your heart. OK,
everybody, let's recite the four P's.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Stephen King.

         
      
   
