
   
   
      
         
            Who's the Wimp?

            
European reporting of the NATO war against Yugoslavia reflected mounting
confusion Wednesday over the way ahead. The Italian and German newspapers
prominently reported their countries' firm opposition to the use of ground
troops, following a meeting in Italy between the German and Italian heads of
government. The Frankfurter
Allgemeine Zeitung and Die Welt also reported on their front pages that German
Chancellor Gerhard Schröder did not rule out an Italian-proposed bombing pause
in the event of a U.N. Security Council resolution supporting the G-8 peace
conditions. La
Repubblica of Rome and Corriere della Sera of Milan both gave front-page treatment
to new peace feelers from Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic. Each said the
Serbs are now ready to accept the G-8 conditions.

            In
London, the liberal Guardian led on "stark differences" among the NATO allies on
war strategy. It said a rift was opening "between the more hawkish governments
in London and Washington and anxious European allies desperate, for domestic
political reasons, for a diplomatic and political breakthrough." But the
consistently hawkish Times of London led on popular protests in southern Serbia
against Milosevic's prosecution of the war. This was clearly intended to
strengthen the case for intensified military action. The Times said in
an editorial that "the growing demoralisation of Serb troops should be
ammunition reinforcing the case for the immediate use in combat of America's
Apache attack helicopters, as part of a more precise and sophisticated military
strategy to drive Serb forces out of Kosovo." Despite President Clinton's
widely reported refusal to rule out the use of ground troops, the Times
continued to portray him as a wimp. "Leadership, for the moment, lies with
London," it said.

            In the
Daily Telegraph , another hawkish conservative newspaper, political
commentator Boris Johnson wrote Wednesday on the op-ed page that all the talk
of British Prime Minister Tony Blair as "Blair the hawk" was "a gigantic
candyfloss illusion" created by his Downing Street spin doctors. "We are now in
the blame game," he wrote, "and Mr Blair is simply positioning himself." Blair
has never publicly spoken out in favor of an invasion of Kosovo but, thanks to
media manipulation, he is now in a "win-win" situation. "If NATO does prevail,
and every single Serb soldier is driven from Kosovo, and every last refugee is
repatriated, then Blair's brows will be crowned with the laurels owed to the
man who urged the Alliance on," Johnson wrote. "[A]nd if NATO fails, Blair will
be able to blame the flaccidity of the Americans, and of the Draft Dodger in
particular."

            
According to a report from Washington Wednesday in the Jerusalem Post , the Clinton
administration is "quietly euphoric" about the election of Labor Party leader
Ehud Barak as the new prime minister of Israel. There was some euphoria in
Europe, too. The Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung splashed the headline
"Barak Promises Rapid Progress in the Middle East Peace Process," and Die
Welt said that his election "arouses new hope worldwide for peace." In
France, Le Monde 's
headline was "Israel: A Massive Vote for Peace," and Le Figaro 's said "Barak
Wants To Relaunch the Peace." Le Monde , in an editorial titled "Israel:
The Good News," said there are now grounds for hope. But in Britain, there was
more skepticism. The Daily Telegraph , for example, said in an editorial
that the election was not "a referendum on peace." It was "a personal,
bare-knuckled contest, fought and lost on the banalities of local politics."
The Times said there can now be progress toward peace, "but only if all
sides are willing to subordinate rhetoric to realism." The Guardian said
that if Barak can't deliver peace, who can? If he can't, "the prospects are
grim."

            
Benjamin Netanyahu got bad press practically everywhere. Ha'aretz said in its
editorial Wednesday that he and "the recalcitrant political
fringes to which he was captive" had effectively frozen the Oslo agreements but
that Barak "now has a renewed opportunity to make peace with the Palestinians
and to attain a real peace with all our neighbors, with Syria at the head." The
Jerusalem Post 's editorial said, however, that Barak's landslide "was not
only a function of his opponent's failures, but of Netanyahu's success." The
paper said, "Netanyahu came into office as leader of the opposition to the Oslo
Accords; he is leaving having brought the Likud solidly and irreversibly into
the Oslo camp. By resolving the peace-and-security debate in Oslo's favor,
Netanyahu made himself obsolete and broke the historic deadlock over the peace
process."

            The
Arab world's reaction to Barak's victory was generally suspicious. An editorial
in the Syrian state-controlled newspaper Tashrin called the Netanyahu
regime a "three-year nightmare" and said Barak should "make drastic changes in
Israel's positions regarding a full withdrawal from occupied Arab lands and a
just and inclusive peace based on U.N. resolutions." The Syria Times
expressed some optimism, but the main thrust of Arab press comment was
negative. A number of Arab columnists argued that while Netanyahu alienated the
United States with his behavior, the "peace-loving" label that has already been
attached to Barak--even though he has done nothing yet to earn it--might allow
him to pursue much the same policies while retaining Western support.

            The
Palestinian Pan-Arab daily al-Quds al-Arabi went so far as to suggest that the day might
yet come when Palestinians will look back on the days of Netanyahu with
something approaching nostalgia. The Saudi daily Asharq al-Awsat said it
feared that Barak might prove to be an even bigger headache for the Arabs than
Netanyahu, for he will pursue much the same hard-line policies as his
predecessor, but with Western backing. Jordanian commentator Fakhri Ka'war
accused state-controlled Arab media of having lulled people into the delusion
that the only obstacle to the peace process was Netanyahu, and that if Barak
won the elections he would prove to be "the great savior who rids the
Palestinian people of their ordeal." But he wrote in the Amman daily
al-Ra'i that the Arabs have learned from bitter experience that Labor
and Likud agree on essentials, share the same expansionist and hegemonic
agenda, and differ only in style. The daily al-Khaleej of the United
Arab Emirates also wondered whether anything has really changed in Israel.
"Barak the pianist has already started playing out of tune," it said. "And if
he finds anyone among us to sing along with him, then we can bid what remains
of peace one thousand good-byes."

         
      
   
