
   
   
      
         
            Trade Stocks by Moonlight

            

               Kosovo update: The International War Crimes Tribunal indicted
Slobodan Milosevic and four of his deputies for deporting and murdering
Kosovars. President Clinton's grudging public spin: This sends a message that
war criminals will be held accountable. The counterspins: 1) The tribunal is a
toothless body that indicts but rarely convicts. 2) It will be tougher to
negotiate with an indicted Milosevic. 3) The indicted Milosevic will become
more militant and violent. The tribunal's answer: NATO shouldn't negotiate with
war criminals anyway. The British spin: The indictments strengthen the case for
ground troops.

            

               The stock markets are adding evening trading hours. NASDAQ
will expand its trading hours next fall, and the New York Stock Exchange is
likely to follow. The upbeat spin: The current hours are relics of Wall
Street's white-shoe era; the global economy obeys no clock, and neither should
the trading floor. The downbeat spin: Longer trading hours will require
everyone from the traders to the regulators to the press to retool their
operations. The ticker-watcher spin: Late-hour trading, which will be lighter
than business-hour trading, will cause stock prices to seesaw. The night owl
spin: 24-hour trading is coming.

            

               Dolly the cloned sheep is aging prematurely. Scientists
discovered that the cells of the 3-year-old sheep are as worn as those of the
6-year-old from which they were cloned. First mystery: Does this mean that
clones assume the age of their genetic sources? Second mystery: If her cells
are 6 years old but her body is 3 years old, how old does that make Dolly?
Third mystery: Since sheep don't get gray hair, how will researchers find
physical signs of aging?

            

               Leonardo da Vinci's Last Supper was unveiled after 20 years of
restoration. Experts scrubbed it of grime but also removed layers of
retouching, leaving blank spots on the canvas. The Italian spin: It's "the most
important restoration of the century." Everyone else's spin: The earlier
touchups were faithful to the original; now that they're gone, even less of
Leonardo's work remains.

            

               A congressional report accused China of nuclear
espionage
               . The gist: China filched the designs for
all seven nuclear warheads currently in the U.S. arsenal; has used the designs
to update its weapons; and has been stealing secrets from American labs for
more than 20 years. China's spin: The findings were fabricated to divert
attention from the embassy bombing. The president's spin: The most damaging
information was taken before I took office. The CIA and Energy Department
spins: The evidence is thin, and there's no way to trace what really happened.
The committee chairman's spin: Only the unclassified portions of the report
were released, and the classified findings are even more damning.

            

               John Huang will plead guilty to conspiring to solicit illegal
contributions to the Democratic National Committee
               .
In exchange for his plea, prosecutors will say that there's no evidence that
Huang committed espionage against the United States, the New York Times
reports. This does not jibe with the earlier Senate investigation, which
leveled suspicions at Huang. The prosecutors' line: The case against Huang was
shakier than they had thought. The Republicans line: It's an outrageous
cover-up. In other Clinton scandal news, Kenneth Starr dropped charges against
Susan McDougal and Julie Hiatt Steele. Spin 1) Starr is finally through. Spin
2) Wait, he's still prosecuting Webster Hubbell. Spin 3) Wait, he's still
preparing to indict the president.

            

               NYPD officer Justin Volpe pleaded guilty to sodomizing Abner Louima
with a stick
               . After fellow cops testified against
him, Volpe admitted his actions to the court in horrific detail. Volpe's spin:
He apologized to his family for hurting them, but not to Louima. Mayor Rudy
Giuliani's spin: By telling the truth, Volpe's colleagues scored a major
victory against police brutality. Activist Al Sharpton's spin: By supporting
Louima, Sharpton scored a major victory against police brutality.

            

               Israel's new prime minister and Yasser Arafat struck a tentative deal
on a Palestinian state. 
               USA Today
reports that Arafat will cede his territorial claim on East Jerusalem. In
return, the Israelis will allow Arafat's government to govern East Jerusalem's
150,000 Palestinians and to control several holy sites. Prime Minister Ehud
Barak will also allow the declaration of a Palestinian state and will permit
the Palestinian capital to be established in East Jerusalem. The triumphant
spin: Barak has already resolved the Jerusalem issue, the thorniest area of
Israeli-Palestinian relations. A niggling detail: Barak has yet to form a
ruling coalition or present the plan to the parliament.

            

               Students may sue their schools for not protecting them against sexual
harassment. A Georgia school may be forced to pay damages to a
fifth-grade girl, the Supreme Court decided, if she can prove that school
officials were "deliberately indifferent" to her torment. The conservative
spin: Schools will now be held liable for garden-variety taunting. The liberal
spin: No, they won't, because it's almost impossible to prove "severe and
pervasive" harassment.

            
               
                  The Phantom
Menace has raked in $102.8 million. The film sold $28.5 million
worth of tickets Wednesday--a new high for single-day and opening-day
grosses--but its $61.8 million weekend gross lags $10 million behind that of
The Lost World: Jurassic Park . The spin: The reviews were disappointing
and so are the returns. The counterspins: A record five-day gross of $102.8
million can't be disappointing, and the press is wailing about "disappointing"
grosses to atone for overhyping the film. The studio's explanation: We
could have shattered weekend records by releasing the film on a Friday
but chose to accommodate fans by opening on Wednesday. The studio's backup
explanation: Ticket sales were depressed by predictions of long queues and
sold-out shows.

         
      
   
