
   
   
      
         
            The Whitney on Prozac

            Each of New York's big art
museums has its own, distinct personality. The Guggenheim is a noisy extrovert
that craves attention. The Met is deep, mysterious, and aloof--it takes years
to really get to know it. MoMA is a bit vain, justifiably so. The oddball of
the group is the Whitney Museum of American Art, which suffers from an
institutional version of bipolar disorder. One day it shouts obscenities in
your face. The next it's calm nearly to the point of affectlessness.

            Lately, the Whitney has
been taking its medication, in the form of new management. Until November 1998,
the director of the museum was David Ross, who left to run the San Francisco
Museum of Modern Art. At the Whitney, Ross created a glittery uptown showcase
for exhibitions of political and conceptual art that often took the form of
whirring installations and blurry videos. The most notorious of these was "The
Black Male in Western Art," at which patrons were handed buttons reading "I
Can't Imagine Ever Wanting to be White." This was a museum that so angered
traditionalists that one of the local weeklies used to run ads for a
Whitney-shaped trash can. The new Whitney, run by a dapper fuddy-duddy named
Maxwell Anderson, who came from the Art Gallery of Ontario, is just the
opposite in almost every respect. Anderson's museum is traditional,
art-history-minded, and eager to ingratiate itself with, rather than
flabbergast and dumbfound, up- and out-of-towners.

            The distillation of the Whitney's new sedateness is "The
American Century: Art and Culture 1900-1950," the first half of a millennial
survey scheduled to occupy the entire museum for the next eight months. Drawing
heavily on works in the museum's permanent collection, some of which are rarely
displayed, Anderson's first attempt at a blockbuster eschews political
correctness, offers no historical revisionism, and even includes work by Norman
Rockwell without quotation marks. It is a bland, textbook summary of American
culture that eschews any explicit judgments at all for fear someone might
disagree. Broad surveys don't have to be dull. Robert Hughes' PBS series and
book American Visions managed to cover a much longer stretch of artistic
waterfront with verve, insight, and erudition. The Whitney show, by contrast,
makes no sense out of American art or culture. It merely drowns us in it.

            The phrase "the American
century" was the coinage of Henry Luce, who in 1941 declared the United States
"the intellectual, scientific, and artistic capital of the world." The first
question asked by Anderson in his introduction to the exhibition catalog is
whether Luce was right when it came to American art. How does the art created
by Americans during the last century stack up against that created by
Europeans? But having raised this issue, "The American Century" never gets
around to proposing an answer. It's as if such a massive assemblage is supposed
to speak for itself. Actually, this exhibition does make a clear statement, but
I don't think it's the one intended. The message is: basta !

            There are more than 700 works on display here, including
not only paintings, drawings, sculptures, and photographs but also sheet music,
music playing in the stairwells, clips from movies, movie posters, novels,
furniture, design objects, architectural models, and stills from dance
programs, plays, operas, and musicals. The Whitney presents this haul
chronologically. After finally getting through the line and into the museum,
visitors get a brief orientation on the ground floor, take the elevator to the
fifth floor, and work their way back down.

            By the time they reached
the 1930s, on the third floor, most viewers were exhibiting the dead-eyed
stares of the Dust Bowl farmers in the Walker Evans and Dorothea Lange
photographs on the walls. By Pearl Harbor, it was like Bataan on Madison
Avenue. People were collapsing on benches with advanced cases of art
prostration. The last section of the exhibition--Abstract Expressionism--was
nearly empty, the audience having surrendered. To see this show at a brisk
clip--say 30 seconds per object, and ignoring the banal wall text--would
require at least four two-hour visits. To curate is to choose, and by failing
to do so, the Whitney has abdicated its essential responsibility.

            Nor does "The American Century" divide up this motherlode
in any thoughtful or even coherent way. The top floor, covering the first two
decades of the century, begins with works that 19 th -century types,
such as Thomas Eakins, John Singer Sargent, and Augustus Saint-Gaudens,
happened to produce after 1900. It ends with Man Ray and Marcel Duchamp, never
having given you much sense of how the vast distance from Point A to Point B
was covered. While the 1920s (the fourth floor) do stand as a plausibly
distinct "era" in American culture, the 1930s (third floor) and the 1940s
(second floor) don't. The various forms of politically driven realism that
flourished during the Depression continued to dominate American art through the
end of World War II. And the New York School of abstraction, which became
predominant after the war, was near its apex, not its end, by the arbitrary
cutoff date of 1950. If you're going to bundle art into packages, they should
at least be tidy. And what's the sense of imposing a rigid and arbitrary
deadline on the exhibition and then decorating the cover of the $60 catalog
with one of Jasper Johns' flag paintings from 1958?

            By shoveling so much in,
Barbara Haskell, the Whitney curator who put together the exhibition, seems to
be trying to build a case that American art in the first half of the
20 th century was up to the standard of European art. But for me, the
exhibition vindicated the conventional view that American art can't hold a
candle to what was happening overseas until after World War II. When you look
at the early American modernists such as Marsden Hartley, Arthur Dove, John
Marin, and Joseph Stella, you see inventive and delightful things. But you
can't compare these guys to their European contemporaries, such as Pablo
Picasso, Georges Braque, Henri Matisse, Piet Mondrian, Amedeo Modigliani,
Gustav Klimt, Egon Schiele, Wassily Kandinsky, or Kasimir Malevich. Or maybe
you can, but the Whitney doesn't try. It is content to examine the American
modernists in relation to their far less interesting domestic contemporaries
and a broad cultural context that seems mostly irrelevant to their work. This
approach may not make you homesick for the tendentiousness of the old Whitney.
But it's an only slightly preferable alternative.

            So, what should the Whitney have done for the millennium?
I'm not sure a modern art museum needs to celebrate the 2,000 th
anniversary of Jesus at all. But one better possibility would have been a real
examination of how the century in art did finally turn American by way of
various attempts to absorb European influences without being smothered by them.
The raw material for that show is all here. Walking through the galleries, you
glimpse a series of moments when an art both new and distinctly American
appears. One was around 1915, when Paul Strand, Morton Schamberg, and Charles
Sheeler rejected the gauzy pictorialism of Alfred Stieglitz for a
cubist-inspired photography that also had a documentary purpose. Another,
related, bright spot was the 1920s' movement that has come to be called
Precisionism, which celebrated American industrialism as a new religion
(Sheeler called one of his paintings of Henry Ford's River Rouge plant My
Egypt ). And, finally, the greatest and most distinctively American modern
school was Abstract Expressionism, which blossomed after World War II and is
snipped in mid-bloom by the end of the exhibition.

            Another way to do it would have been a look at the
Whitney itself. Such a show might have opened with the same Robert Henri
portrait of Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney included here and brought many of the
same paintings she collected out of the vault for a fresh look. But such a show
would have meant the museum taking a hard look at its own, often controversial
part in the art world. And I don't get the sense that's something the Whitney,
or its conciliatory new director, is very eager to do.

         
      
   
