
   
   
      
         
             Guys and Dolls

            In 1968, an alcoholic,
mentally ill writer named Frederick Exley published a "fictional memoir" whose
subject was American manhood as embodied by football great Frank Gifford. The
book, A Fan's Notes , became a cult classic and in it Gifford is
everything Exley will never be: graceful, gifted, daring, physically perfect.
They attended the University of Southern California at the same time, and Exley
writes of Gifford's standing at the school, "I know of no way of describing
this phenomenon short of equating it with being the Pope in the Vatican." And
once, when their paths crossed, Exley writes, he wanted to shout at Gifford's
godlike figure, "Listen, you son of a bitch, life isn't all a goddam football
game! You won't always get the girl! Life is rejection and pain and loss."

            Would Exley, who died
seven years ago, feel pity and fear for the life Gifford now leads as the
consort of monomaniacal talk show host and tabloid cover girl Kathie Lee
Gifford? Would he revel in or lament Gifford's two-year emasculation by
humiliation from his wife because he had a one-night stand with a megamammaried
miss? What would Exley make of this week's story in the National
Enquirer on the nightmare of being married to Kathie Lee by her first
husband, Paul Johnson, who offers this observation, "I see Frank Gifford with
the same confused look on his face that I used to get. To me it clearly says,
'What hit me? How do I get out of here?' "

            The tabs recently have been offering a series of unhappy
meditations on the nature of masculinity today. For example, also walking that
long road from gridiron glory to gelding is Joe Namath, 55. His 37-year-old
wife was so bored watching him golf away his retirement in Florida, according
to the Enquirer , that she fled to Los Angeles, leaving the couple's two
daughters with Namath. She is now dating plastic surgeon Brian Novack, who is,
according to the publication, "a renowned expert in penis and breast
enhancement." Namath, an insider reports, is "devastated." But Broadway Joe
should have seen it coming. When he got married, his wife's name was Deborah,
now she calls herself Tatiana. Any divorce lawyer can tell you that when Debbie
becomes Tatiana, it's time to freeze your bank accounts.

            The news about young
manhood is no more encouraging. According to the tabs, two young idols are as
exciting in the sack as a sack of wet oatmeal. The Globe reports that a
British barmaid, Linnea Dietrichson, says Leonardo DiCaprio picked her up at a
London nightclub and took her back to his room. "He looked flabby and pale. He
was drunk and fumbling. It lasted five minutes, then Leo fell asleep."
Devastating as this revelation is, it is unlikely to appreciably affect
DiCaprio's ability to lure more barmaids up for a five-minute fumble.

            And according to the Star , the late director Stanley
Kubrick had to hire "sex therapists" in order to show Tom Cruise and Nicole
Kidman how to make love on camera for the film Eyes Wide Shut . According
to an "insider" on the set of the sexually explicit movie, the real-life couple
was "totally unconvincing as lovers ... Tom and Nicole had absolutely no
chemistry." So Wendy and Tony Duffield, who had sex three times a day for three
weeks for a 1994 BBC documentary series (maybe PBS could broadcast this during
pledge week), were brought in as consultants. "They had a good look at Tom and
Nicole and then they shook their heads and kinda winced," reports the
Star . "They took over the set and showed how it was really done."

            On to the self-pitying
weenie Fabio. The long-haired model was hit in the nose by a goose while
promoting a roller coaster ride at Busch Gardens in Virginia. Since he
dispatched the goose with his own bare beak, did he proudly roast the bird and
serve it for dinner? No, he took to his bed. "He's still too shook up to talk,"
his mother, Flora, told the Enquirer . "He's been in bed for three days!"
And Fabio complained, "It's not funny--I could have lost my model good looks."
Let's see, he was hit in the schnoz by a goose and had to get two whole
stitches. If you cast your gaze over the world today, you'd be hard pressed to
find anything that is a starker example of tragedy.

            How about the fatuous? According to the Enquirer ,
Brad Pitt says he will marry Jennifer Aniston if she promises to "lose and keep
off an extra five pounds that always seem to plague her." In turn, he promises
to give up drinking. The publication does not say that if Aniston keeps off the
five pounds, he promises not to grow hair out of his ears or ever say, "Honey,
can you squeeze this thing on my back?" According to the Globe , the
reason Pitt is hesitating to marry the eager Aniston is that he is afraid of
alienating his gay fans.

            More charming are the
merely naughty. A few weeks ago, the Drudge Report published an
unsourced item claiming that an unnamed potential presidential candidate was
worried that a picture of this youthful PPC dancing nude on a bar was out there
somewhere. Well, now the Star has revealed that the PPC is Texas Gov.
George W. Bush. (Keeping Tabs was hoping it was the too-perfect Elizabeth Dole
but is also relieved it wasn't the so-far-from-perfect Steve Forbes.)
Ominously, Bush's spokeswoman has denied the story by saying, "Yeah, and green
aliens have landed on the lawn of the governor's mansion." It was Kathie Lee
Gifford who used almost the same space alien dismissal when stories of her
husband's affair first broke in the Globe .

            Then there are the creeps. Perennial bad boy Gary Busey is
again trying to put his marriage back together in his unique way, according to
the Enquirer . When Busey, 54, married his latest wife, Tiani, 31, he was
addicted to cocaine. But even after he stopped taking drugs, he continued to be
abusive to her. Tiani started reading codependency books by best-selling author
Melody Beattie, and the couple eventually met the writer, who, according to
Tiani, "bonded really well with Gary. She was helping us through some rough
times." Then, in January, he was arrested for beating Tiani. But Busey's
bonding with Beattie continued apace when he moved into her home. The actor
insists, however, that there's nothing going on between them and that he is
totally focused on repairing his marriage. Toward that end, he tells the
Enquirer , "I'm going to the Hoffman Quatrine Institute for anger
management classes." Maybe something beautiful will come of all this. It's hard
not to get choked up when you read Busey's promise to his estranged wife, "I'll
be there when the restraining order has expired."

            Perhaps only the antics
of Lynn Redgrave's estranged husband could top that. According to the
Enquirer , John Clark, who has been married to Redgrave for more than 30
years, fathered a child eight years ago by his personal assistant. (Note to
Hollywood wives: Try to hire someone who looks like Lillian Hellman to be your
husband's personal assistant.) The young woman, Nicolette, kept Clark's
identity as the father of her child a secret and went on to marry Clark and
Redgrave's son, Ben. When Ben found out he was married to the mother of his
stepbrother, he insisted that the truth be revealed. Ben and Nicolette split,
and Nicolette began seeing a married plumber who was doing work on Clark's
house. Clark demanded that the plumber not hang around Nicolette and their son
and Nicolette got so angry she filed a restraining order against Clark. He
retaliated by filing one against her. To Clark, the whole sordid mess comes
down to this: "If I didn't have a prostate condition that plumber would never
have gotten close to Nicolette. But sadly, I haven't had sex in five years."
Clark also expressed the hope that he and Redgrave could continue with their
marriage. According to the actress, they couldn't.

            OK, maybe someone can top Busey and Redgrave. That is
George Richey, widower of country singer Tammy Wynette. At Wynette's funeral
last year, Richey virtually had to be kept from jumping in her grave after her.
Now it appears that he may have been simply assuring himself she really was
dead, at least according to three of Wynette's daughters, who have filed a $50
million wrongful death suit against Richey and a doctor. The suit, reports the
Star , claims Richey ignored Wynette's doctor's advice that she be given
immediate medical attention (the doctor was 500 miles away), and instead
continued to administer narcotics--which had been prescribed by the doctor--to
the failing singer. According to published reports in the mainstream press, 911
was not called until hours after Wynette's death, nor was an autopsy
performed.

            Do the tabloids offer any hope for the male of the
species? Just this promise for the future. According to the Star , Mia
Farrow is adopting yet another baby, and she plans to name this one after her
late former husband. Welcome to the world, Frank Sinatra Farrow.

         
      
   
