
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Segregation Today,
Segregation Tomorrow
            

            Boston College administrators may
force feminist theologian Mary Daly to admit men into her classroom. For 25 years,
Daly has preached her brand of mystical feminism and revolution against the
patriarchy to an all-female audience. Most men stayed away, and those who
enrolled were assigned to a special section. But last fall, a male student
enlisted the support of a conservative law firm and threatened to sue under
discrimination law after Daly ejected him and another male from her classroom.
Rather than admit the men to "Introduction to Feminist Ethics," Daly took the
semester off, accused the school of "caving into right-wing pressure," and
refused the retirement package offered by the Jesuit school. Institutions find
themselves increasingly under legal scrutiny for supporting race and gender
preferences. Last month, Dartmouth College announced that it will no longer
tolerate single-sex policies at the school's fraternities and sororities, while
Radcliffe College said it would encourage more men to apply for its prestigious
Bunting Institute fellowships. Meanwhile, federal courts continue to debate
whether the National Collegiate Athletic Association should be subject to
federal sex discrimination laws.

            
               The Presidents of
the United States of America
            

            College presidents can
now be hired from a temp agency. According to the Wall Street Journal ,
the Florida-based Registry for College and University Presidents maintains a
list of 55 retired college presidents who are ready to lead academic
institutions around the country on an interim basis. Robert Funk, the former
president of a Seattle college, is already finishing up his second
assignment.

            
               Book
Bind
            

            Looking for a book?
Don't go to East Lansing, Mich. Michigan State University's Movimiento Estudantil Xicano de
Aztlan (Chicano Student Movement) took 4,500 university library books hostage
for a day and presented the administration with a list of demands that included
asking the university to inaugurate a Hispanic studies major, hire more
Hispanic faculty, introduce dormitory "culture rooms" devoted to Latino themes,
and name a building after Cesar Chavez. Will booknappings catch on? When
Columbia University undergraduates wanted an ethnic studies major a couple of
years ago, they held a successful hunger strike on campus. It remains to be
seen whether hoarding books will prove as effective as self-starvation.

            
               Surrender Your
Right to Party
            

            Universities are playing
parent again, reported the New York Times this month: Pennsylvania State University now
hosts an alcohol-free student center that features adult-supervised weekend
parties; the University of
Wisconsin has started theater outings for students and staff; the University of Virginia may
start telling parents of student drinking violations; Lehigh University prohibits
campus parties without a staff member or approved adult in attendance; and
after 10 students suffered alcohol poisoning in January, Princeton
University banned its annual Nude
Olympics, in which students streak naked through campus on the night of the
year's first snowfall. According to the Times , the crackdowns represent
the biggest shift in campus social policy since the '60s student revolts
ushered in laissez-faire attitudes. Both ends of the political spectrum seem to
favor the trend. The Chronicle of Higher Education attributes the increase
enrollment at Christian colleges--up 24 percent between 1990 and 1996--partly
to parents' concerns about binge drinking and other behaviors at public
institutions. Meanwhile, in a Times op-ed, libertarian feminist Katie
Roiphe declared herself in favor of "establishing a benign and diffuse adult
presence" on campus.

            
               Block
Busting
            

            Washington's new mayor,
Anthony A. Williams, wants to move the beleaguered University of the District of
Columbia from its affluent Northwest Washington digs to Anacostia, the
District's poorest and most isolated area. The school's poor academic record
has made it a frequent target of critics but, according to the Washington
Post , Williams still believes it can become a magnet for economic
development in its new location. UDC President Julius Nimmons Jr. worries that
the move will demoralize a school, which, like the District itself, is just
beginning to recover from a fiscal crisis. Other critics add that the
university's current presence in Northwest gives many Washingtonians a valuable
opportunity to leave their troubled neighborhoods behind.

            
               Ad-git
Prop
            

            The Menchú wars continue.
David Horowitz, right-wing firebrand and head of the Center for the Study of Popular
Culture, has taken out an ad
in six college newspapers excoriating "tenured radicals" for defending the
distorted autobiographical writings of Guatemalan Nobel laureate and activist
Rigoberta Menchú. (See the Feb. 2 "" for the back story.) The ad singles out
one Wellesley College professor by name and declares, "This fraud was
originally perpetrated and is still defended by your professors." A few weeks
ago, a conservative foundation placed an ad in college papers urging
undergraduates to sue their schools in order to battle affirmative action
policies. Will suing professors be next?

            
               The
Bookie
            

            Robert Darnton, an
expert on the history of the book, predicts a long life for the medium in the
New York Review of Books . The prophecies of '60s media
guru Marshall McLuhan have not come to pass. In spite of the rise of television
and the Internet, we do not live in a "post-literate" civilization dominated by
"technological man." Although the book remains uniquely portable, durable, and
an aesthetically satisfying means of conveying written information, there is
one corner of the Gutenberg galaxy where print may be passé--the world of
scholarly publishing. The monograph, traditionally the young academic's ticket
to tenure and promotion, has become too expensive for presses to produce or for
libraries to purchase. Darnton suggests that electronic publishing can change
not only the way scholarly work is disseminated--online rather than in the
stacks--but also the shape of scholarship itself. The electronic book would
ideally be arranged "in layers, ... like a pyramid." Readers could move from
basic information to complex analysis, from primary sources to ongoing debates.
The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation and the American Council of Learned Societies
have committed funds to the development of such books.

            
               School's Out for
Chandra
            

            Malaysian dissident
Chandra
Muzaffar lost his post at Universiti Malaya last month. University officials claim that
tight finances forced them to cut funding for Chandra's Centre for
Civilisational Dialogue. But human rights groups in Malaysia and abroad see
other motivations at work: A vocal supporter of the embattled ex-Deputy Prime
Minister Anwar Ibrahim, Chandra has "frequently criticized the abuses of power
by the authorities," writes one Malaysian group. He was the founding president
of a prominent Malaysian human rights organization and, together with Anwar's
wife, Azizah Ismail, he founded the Social Justice Movement known in Malaysia
as Adil. Human Rights Watch
has initiated a campaign on Chandra's behalf. Jonathan Fanton, chair of Human
Rights Watch and president of the New School University, wrote to the Malaysian
government urging both an investigation into Chandra's dismissal and a stop to
the spread of political battles into the academic realm.

            
               MIT's Woman
Problem
            

            Confessing a decades-long pattern of discrimination
against female faculty, Massachusetts Institute of Technology is taking measures to cure
itself. In a report posted on the Web, the country's leading institute of
science documents entrenched if subtle discrimination against women in almost
every aspect of professional academic life from salaries and promotions to
committee work and office size. The report notes that the school's tenure rate
for women has stagnated at 8 percent for two decades (the national average is
26 percent) and that women faculty were required to raise twice as much money
in outside grants as men. "I believe that in no case was this discrimination
conscious or deliberate," Robert Birgeneau, dean of MIT's School of Science
told the New York Times . "Nevertheless, the effects were real."
Birgeneau has promised increases in salary, lab space, and research money to
women faculty and vowed to bring the number of tenured females to 10 percent by
next year.

         
      
   
