
   
   
      
         
            The Freedom Trap

            It occurred to me, while
laboring to write this column and make a bit of money to support my family,
that it would do wonders for my stifled creativity to drive somewhere tropical,
sip single-barrel bourbon, and have sex with a tawny barmaid. Of course, when I
was at liberty to do all that I didn't. Instead, I'd think, if I could only
meet a woman of substance and put down roots, I'd be less anxious about earthly
impermanence and be really poised to cultivate my creativity ... By a
not-so-strange coincidence, this conflict is prominent in lots of recent
movies, among them A Walk on the Moon , Metroland , and Among
Giants , which explore the natural impulse to settle down vs. the equally
natural impulse to be wild and free--the yearning for permanence vs. the
claustrophobic dread of monogamy.

            No dilemma causes men
and women to fantasize so intensely about splitting themselves in two and
taking both roads. And none provides more fodder for melancholy middle-aged
comedy, from the heavyweight musings of Milan Kundera in The Unbearable
Lightness of Being to the fluffy screwball machinations of Forces of
Nature . In the latter, currently the most popular movie in the country, the
filmmakers strain to bring together free spirit Sandra Bullock and affianced
fuddy-duddy Ben Affleck. Then they do a bizarre about-face and deliver a paean
to the bliss of domesticity. That ending satisfies no one, but you can
appreciate the filmmakers' lack of options: Kundera resolves the conflict by
hurtling his lovers' pickup down an incline and crushing their bodies to a
pulp.

            It's worth remembering that Kundera's sexual parables
unfold against a backdrop of totalitarian repression, whereas our own grapple
with a more confusing legacy: the counterculture of the '60s and '70s. Set in
1969, A Walk on the Moon devises a deliciously resonant dual setting: a
Catskills summer community to which middle-class Jews from the city migrate to
swim and eat and play mah-jongg, and the gathering hippies at nearby Woodstock.
The proximity of New World '60s hedonism puts a sort of lunar spell on Pearl
(Diane Lane), a 31-year-old mother of two whose own "summer of love" was
cruelly brief. She got pregnant at 17 and promptly married the baby's father,
Marty (Liev Schreiber)--now a TV repairman who's stuck in the city fixing
broken sets in time for Neil Armstrong's moon walk--and settled into a life of
looking after kids and chopping vegetables. So, let's see: hot weather, free
love in the breeze, an anti-establishment, pubescent daughter (Anna Paquin),
and an absent husband. Into this sexually tremulous milieu comes Viggo
Mortensen, one of the van-driving peddlers who make regular trips to the
compound to sell shmattes to bargain-hungry Jewish ladies. A rangy,
purringly diffident blond gentile with blue eyes and a cleft chin, he watches
as Pearl slips on a tie-dyed T-shirt, then leans his lips toward her bare
throat--and bites off the dangling price tag. One can hardly blame Pearl for
saying, "Family shmamily."

            The elements in A Walk
on the Moon , which is directed by the actor Tony Goldwyn (the bad guy in
Ghost ) and written by Pamela Gray, feel miraculously right. Gray's
script seems meticulously worked out, right down to setting the moonwalk
against Pearl in her own libidinal orbit. But if the writing is tidy, it's
never glib--it has too much texture for glibness. I think back with pleasure on
the shared fascination of Marty and his young son over how many minutes it
takes him to drive from the city to the Catskills every week, the bubbly
nonchalance of the Catskills women, and the presence in the margins of Orthodox
Jews, who find it increasingly difficult to coexist with "Purple Haze,"
skinny-dippers, and women's lib.

            Diane Lane's performance puts her in the company of the
best young actresses alive. Her Pearl is at an age when you can see in her skin
the last traces of girlish pliancy but also where the cares have begun to leave
a residue. Alone in her kitchen with her cutting board, she seems to be
smelling her own faint over-ripeness; when Mortensen holds his stare a beat too
long, her body bends toward his as if it knows, on a cellular level, that this
way lies nourishment. Lane and Mortensen have an extrasensory rapport--they
magnetize each other. When you see them at Woodstock it's through the aghast
eyes of her daughter, who thought of herself as a groover until she caught a
glimpse of Mom in a most unmomlike state of sexual ecstasy--Dionysically
pickled.

            This kind of picture has
one of two thrusts: It either sides with the suffocated housewife who, like
Ibsen's Nora, strives to break free of a repressive patriarchal hold, or it
demonizes a culture that tempts men and women to put their own gratification
before their responsibilities as parents. A Walk on the Moon leans to
the side of "family values" but scapegoats no one--neither the decent but
insensitive Marty nor the opportunistic salesman. Even the moralistic mystic of
a grandmother, Lilian (Tovah Feldshuh), can't forestall Pearl's flowering.
Lilian embodies the culture's eternal wisdom but also its antediluvian folly.
Greeting the news of her granddaughter's first menses, she blurts, "Mazel
tov !" and then slaps the child--a tradition evidently meant to celebrate
the beginning of reproductive life, while reinforcing a girl's sense of shame
over the fact that she's now "unclean." A culture so stern would drive most
people into the tie-dyed bosom of salesman, even if he didn't look like Viggo
Mortensen.

            He might, for instance, resemble Lee Ross, who plays the
militantly nonconformist Toni, buddy of Chris (Christian Bale), in
Metroland , based on an early novel by Julian Barnes. The time is 1977:
After a five-year absence, Toni visits Chris at his suburban London row house.
He's there to deride him for having a genteel wife, Marion (Emily Watson), a
baby daughter, and a job snapping pictures for an ad agency--and to remind him
that once, in the '60s, they shared an ambition to escape such soul-quashing
homogeneity.

            Toni's point would be more pressing if he weren't
such an unpalatable poster boy for freedom--pasty with dissipation, with thin,
purplish lips. Plus, he's an unmistakable sponge. But Chris and his missus are
having an arid patch, sexually speaking, so Toni's exhortations prompt heady
flashbacks to less confining times: Chris' days as an arty photographer in
Paris, when he learned how to make love to les 
               femmes from a
lusciously soft-thighed coquette called Annick (Elsa Zylberstein). But that
idyll was cut short when he met Marion. Torn between French free-spiritedness
and the gnawing English sense that he ought to set about structuring a life,
the 21-year-old Chris drifted--more or less by default--into the Englishwoman's
arms.

            
               Metroland , while
poky and schematic, is full of disconcertingly sharp talk between lovers
before, during, and after sex. And while it's true that you can't pack as much
psychological detail into a movie as you can into a novel, director Philip
Saville and screenwriter Adrian Hodges bring out the yeasty subtext of even the
most brittle encounters: The suspense is in waiting to hear how characters will
phrase what you've already read in their faces. The movie's triumph is the
casting of Watson in an unusually self-possessed role. I found her prim little
Mona Lisa smirk and teasingly buttoned-up demeanor almost maddeningly
sexy--more alluring by miles than the smeary-mouthed French sexpot. Bale, a
wonderfully sensitive actor who here looks like Watson with an Adam's apple,
can only stare open-mouthed, helpless, knowing she's his destiny and not even
much minding that it will take him back to Metroland. Is it unfair to skew the
case for a life of suburban domesticity this way? Watson is such a diabolical
minx that she makes the prospect of a life amid those metros and under those
gray skies more seductive than an endless luau. I wish I could tell you for
sure that the "happy" ending isn't meant to be ironic, but that's not how it
felt to this aspiring suburbanite.

            In Among Giants , another English romance in which
freedom and security play footsie, the rover is a woman: an Australian
"climbah" named Gerry (Rachel Griffiths) who joins up with a cowboylike crew of
daredevil painters led by Pete Postlethwaite's Ray--they have 15 miles of
mammoth electric towers to coat in a mere three months. The director, Sam
Miller, goes in for Lewis Hine-like images of men high in the air, at once
dwarfed and exalted, with synthesized strings to provide a touch of foggy
mysticism. Much of Among Giants affords an agreeable blend of the gritty
and the synthetic, and the two main actors are a treat. "You love it up here,
don't you?" says Griffiths, whose character is starting to fall for the older
foreman. "Oh, I'm king up here, lass," says Postlethwaite, looking more
leathery and Asiatic than ever, like the mummified fossil of some early man.
Griffiths, who played a free spirit in Muriel's Wedding (1994) and the
simpy Hilary du Pré in last year's Hilary 
               and Jackie , has a large
nose and receding chin and looks quite homely from one or two angles. But from
the only angles that matter she's beautiful, and her Gerry has a darting
intelligence to boot.

            There's no reason Gerry and Ray couldn't have made
a lifelong adventure of it--scaling rocks, romping naked through abandoned
factories, gazing in awe at big rigs. But the screenwriter, Simon Beaufoy
( The Full Monty ), has a thing about bringing macho men down to earth
with a thud. Last time the deflation was funny and it worked; this time the bad
vibes make the whole picture wither. If any couple could have synthesized the
impulses to rove and stay put, it's this one, but Beaufoy throws in the towel
at the point where the husbands and wives of A Walk on the 
               Moon
and Metroland are just getting warmed up.

         
      
   
