
   
   
      
         
            Hardball High School

            American satire rarely
comes more winning than Election , an exuberantly caustic comedy that
shows the symbiotic relationship between political go-get-'em-ism and moral
backsliding. That's hardly a new theme, but the director, Alexander Payne
( Citizen Ruth , 1996), has a Preston Sturges-like gift for going against
the grain of his own cynicism, so that the movie fairly drips with irony
without ever losing its raffish energy or its sense of wonder. It feels
miraculously fresh.

            
               Election
unfolds in an Omaha, Neb., high school, where its go-getter, Tracy Flick (Reese
Witherspoon), mounts a tireless run for presidency of the student council.
Flick's name is clearly an hommage to Sammy Glick, the Hollywood hustler
of Budd Schulberg's classic portrait of '30s ambition, What Makes Sammy
Run
               ? Glick was viewed through the eyes of Al Manheim, a jaded
lefty alcoholic who regarded this new species of capitalist human with contempt
but also with awe: Sammy was a force of nature. The Al Manheim of
Election is a teacher, Jim McAllister (Matthew Broderick), who watches
Tracy's hand shoot up in class and can't bring himself to call on her. Her
know-it-all persona makes him sick, and without fully realizing what he's
doing, he sets about trying to sabotage her candidacy.

            Some achievers--call them carpe diem -ists--have
talent and passion and deserve to rise, but many are rockets without payloads.
That's Tracy. Friendless, encased in a hothouse terrarium of her own ambition,
she has no goals beyond furthering her own career. At the same time, there's
something maddeningly attractive about her: She's a hot little number. Payne
freezes on her face at its most nauseatingly self-congratulatory, while
McAllister recalls (in voice-over narration) how his fellow teacher and best
friend, Dave Novotny (Mark Harelik), initiated a wildly destructive affair with
her and got himself booted out of the school and his marriage. Tracy grew up
without a father and with a mother (Colleen Camp) whose hobby was writing to
successful women and asking how they did it. In class, her legs cross primly
under her desk while her hand snaps up like a Sieg Heil . When she stamps
out "Tracy Flick for President" buttons on her hand-operated button press, she
sets her big jaw and grits her teeth and bears down as if eliminating her
rivals with every squeeze. The cogs in her brain turn feverishly. Scanning a
rival's nominating petition, she seizes instantly on an unfamiliar name: "Who's
he? I've never heard of him."

            
               Election will
make Witherspoon a star. The actress came into her own three years ago in
Freeway , a B-movie Red Riding Hood story that was a little too campily
self-conscious for its own credibility. But its central section, in which the
runaway trailer-park teen climbs into a car driven by a serial killer (Kiefer
Sutherland), made for a ghoulishly amusing psychodrama, and Witherspoon's
mixture of soulfulness and incorrigibility was enchanting. She's OK playing
victims, as in Cruel Intentions , but she goes into the comic
stratosphere when her characters have a mighty will--when she can use that
steel jaw and laser-light delivery. Announcing that "the weak always try to
sabotage the strong," Tracy instantly sizes up Broderick's McAllister. The two
work magically well together. Broderick provoked a lot of nasty reviews in
Godzilla (1998), but it wasn't his fault that his worried wiseguy act
came to embody everything that was lightweight and fatuously noncommittal about
that awful movie. In Election , he has his first fully rounded grown-up
role, and he's perfect: He makes the teacher's anguish absurdly funny without
caricaturing the pain. Broderick's McAllister is a kid who wakes up one day and
realizes he's grown and has nothing to show for it. Stuck in a sexless and
childless marriage (he retreats to the basement to watch porn tapes) and
presented with a certainty--Tracy's election--he makes the fatal decision to
fight the power. He picks his own candidate, a sweet, injured jock named Paul
Metzler (the delightful Chris Klein), a kid so unlike Tracy that he can't even
bring himself to check off his own name on the ballot.

            E lection is scaled small. Working from a trim novel
by Tom Perrotta, Payne and co-writer Jim Taylor don't squander their resources
on crowds or parades or elaborate spoofs of ceremony, the way most political
satires tend to do. Nor do they feign an understanding of the populace, in this
case a student body that seems uninterested in which of the candidates ends up
getting a job that usually consists of planning the prom. They keep the focus
narrow, on the individuals. But each private act has rippling and tumultuous
public consequences. The geometry of the movie becomes dizzying. When the
girlfriend (Frankie Ingrassia) of Paul's lesbian sister Tammy (Jessica
Campbell) has a bout of homosexual panic and throws herself at the unwitting
jock, the vindictive Tammy jumps into the race as a third candidate, adopting a
nihilist "Who Cares?" platform that nearly sandbags the whole election. And
through some weird transference (displaced lust for Tracy?), McAllister becomes
fixated on Linda Novotny (Delaney Driscoll), the wife of his exiled best
friend. His desperate attempts to bed her make him reckless and seal his doom:
Stung by a wasp outside her window, he staggers into school on Election Day
with his eye as swollen and saggy as Quasimodo's--and morally hunchbacked, to
boot.

            It's difficult not to
overpraise Election : It's perfect. Some will complain that McAllister's
slapstick-tragic lust for Linda shifts the focus too much from the campaign to
the bedroom, but the movie means to be more than a study of electoral
machinations. Unlike Mike Nichols' glib Primary Colors (1998), which
seized every opportunity to take cheap shots at its characters, Payne seizes
every opportunity to give his characters more dimension. When Tracy comes upon
Paul at a table, gathering signatures for his nominating petition, she responds
with cold fury, but she also scrawls her name on his sheet--a complex, defiant,
irreducible gesture. And when she glimpses defeat, her pain is truly
heartbreaking. She curls herself up in her mother's lap and weeps with the
agony of the empty. That's what makes Election so much more insightful
than Primary Colors : Tracy isn't fatted and self-satisfied like Nichols'
version of Clinton. She's insatiable because the hunger to succeed is what
formed her. She has no self to deform.

            I'll try not to eviscerate the laughably dour
eXistenZ , a virtual-reality guessing game of a thriller in which David
Cronenberg, evidently licking his wounds over the calamitous receptions of
Crash (1996), M. Butterfly (1993), and Naked Lunch (1991),
goes back to the terrain he once profitably mined in Scanners (1981) and
Videodrome (1983). Cronenberg's early movies were somber but had
horrific metaphors that ate into the mind, and he showed signs in The
Fly (1986) and Dead Ringers (1988) of actually developing a sense of
humor to complement his paranoid-gynecologist's vision. But eXistenZ is
a return to the lugubrious. It's named for a virtual-reality game that the
characters play with "biopods"--living disk drives that plug into vaginal holes
at the base of people's spines. (The only time Cronenberg seems to be having
fun in the film is when he's exploring these squishy openings.) As the game's
ingenious designer, hunted by militant "realists" who want to stamp out virtual
reality, Jennifer Jason Leigh is just the kind of drudge heroine that
Cronenberg doesn't need. Trying to underact these days, she still can't walk
across a room without looking self-conscious, and the rest of the performances
(by Jude Law, Ian Holm, Willem Dafoe, Christopher Eccleston, and Don McKellar)
are so terrible that it's hard to know whether Cronenberg wants to signal that
much of what we're seeing isn't "real" or he has just forgotten how to write
for hemoglobular flesh vessels--i.e., human beings.

         
      
   
