
   
   
      
         
            No. 242: &quot;Reading Is Fundamentalism&quot;

            
               Kicking off a $7
million ad campaign, gospel singers, children, and evangelists poured out of a
giant copy of The Book , an updated, "cool" version of the Bible. But,
says The Book 's promoter, televangelist and former presidential
candidate Pat Robertson, "Our goal is not to sell Bibles. It is to make
Bible-reading cool and American." Participants are invited to devise other ways
to achieve that goal.
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Sunday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Wednesday's
Question (No. 241)--"A Very Special ...":
            

            

               A recent episode of a popular TV series was postponed because it was
frighteningly like an actual, front-page event. Now the network says it will go
ahead and broadcast the show's season finale, although it too is disturbingly
reminiscent of that same event. How will the listing in TV Guide
describe the big show?
            

            
"Dharma and Greg (ABC; 8 p.m.): Dharma gets her toe stuck in a bowling
ball and shoots BBC newscaster Jill Dando in the head."-- Tim
Carvell
            

            
"Friends (NBC; 8 p.m.): A puffy, besotted Chandler dissolves his
Cabinet--again! Also: Phoebe decides to learn to ski."-- Bill Wasik
( Robert Rothman had a similar answer.)

            
"Drew's Uncle Charlton makes an ass of himself at the convention."-- Bob
Ringle
            

            
"Ally McBeal : A horrific school shooting provokes discussion and
soul-searching among the Boston legal community and the nation. Ally frets over
her uncertain love life and her biological clock."-- Ananda "Hear, Hear!
Death to the Autoreplies!" Gupta
            

            
"Buffy the Vampire Slayer : Head cheerleader Andie Pamerson decides to
remove her breast implants because they're possessed by demons."-- Steven
Kiefer
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            "Map maker, map maker, make me a map.
Find me a find, catch me a cat.
Map maker, map maker, make up your mind,
and make me a perfect map!"

            
--from the Broadway musical Fiddler Somewhere in the General Vicinity of the
Roof
            

            The news event most
participants played with was, of course, the bombing of the Chinese Embassy.
This story contains two sure-fire comic ingredients (at least for 12-year-old
boys): incompetence and destruction. Thus, Roadrunner . Thus, the string
of successes on Late Night With David Letterman involving the dimwitted
demolition of culturally evocative objects--Running Stuff Over With a Steam
Roller, Dropping Stuff off a Five-Story Tower, Crushing Stuff in a Hydraulic
Press, Dropping a 1,000-Pound Weight Onto Stuff, Crashing Into Stuff With a
Locomotive. With one fleeting exception, when he shot up, and later blew up,
his own cue cards, Dave shunned firearms and explosions. Just not funny. If he
were alive today, he'd never get a show on the WB.

            
               Buffy the Vampire
Answer
            

            I don't have a copy of TV Guide around, but
the New York Times described Tuesday's episode this way: "Cordelia likes
the new watcher."

            Last month, the WB pulled "Earshot,'' an episode of
Buffy the Vampire Slayer where Sarah Michelle Gellar stumbles onto a
mass-murder plan by fellow students. This past Monday, the network announced
that it would run Buffy's two-part finale, "Graduation Day," chockablock with
gun-toting high-school kids.

            "We are airing the
episodes. There are no plans to pull them," said Julie Kingsdale, a WB
spokeswoman owned by Time Warner Inc. No, wait: It is the WB and not Kingsdale
that is owned by Time Warner. Under current U.S. law, human beings cannot be
owned and must instead be rented.

            
               A Personal Tribute
From Jon Delfin
            

            To the shame of my
closest friends, I am now hooked on Buffy. Been watching since December. My
favorite episode so far was the one where Armageddon was the "B" story. Last
night's best moment (which I suspect won't travel well out of context) was when
the prom emcee thanked Buffy for saving so many students' lives that "our class
has the lowest mortality rate in the history of the school!"

            
               Augmented
Quotations Extra
            

            (Each final sentence added by News Quiz.)

            

               "If you do the procedure correctly, it's very
safe. And right after surgery, I take the fat I sucked out and fry up a couple
of eggs."--Dr. Alan Kling defends liposuction, despite a few regrettable
deaths.

               "This product is made with fur from animals that
may have been killed by electrocution, gassing, neck breaking, poisoning,
clubbing, stomping or drowning, and may have been trapped in steel-jawed
leghold traps. Or by improperly performed liposuction."--Warning label that
would have appeared on fur coats had Beverly Hills approved Proposition A.

               "Instead of Theodore Roosevelt's 'talk softly and
carry a big stick,' we have yelled and carried a toothpick. And so I announce
my intention to undergo penile enlargement, and as long as you're down there,
let's go for the scrotum enhancement."--Retired but not retiring, Newt Gingrich
assesses our Kosovo policy.

               "Supposedly everybody
was watching, and in reality no one was watching. But then again, who wants to
see Newt Gingrich get his penis stretched?"--Arkansas Sen. Blanche Lambert
Lincoln assesses security failings at the Energy Department.

            

            
               Tech
Talk
            

            

               
                  Slate
                has ordered the autoreply shut off. There is,
however, little they can do about the fawning farewells to Robert Rubin.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Chinese takeout.

         
      
   
