
   
   
      
         
             Account Overwrought

            Banking regulatory issues do not normally spark
interest, let alone outrage. But more than a quarter of a million furious
comments flooded the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. to protest the "Know Your
Customer" regulations proposed by banking agencies last December. The regs
would have required that banks determine customers' sources of funds, create
client profiles based on transaction patterns, monitor accounts for deviations,
investigate irregularities, and report unexplained activities to federal
authorities.

            "Tyrannical" and "Gestapo-like," declared the
nation's editorial writers. Also fanning the public outrage were the Eagle
Forum, the American Civil Liberties Union, and the Libertarian Party, which
decried the invasion of privacy posed by the "KYC" regs, as they came to be
known. Of all the correspondence, only about 100 positive comments were
recorded, with "Go for it, and I'll see you in the place where there is no
darkness" counted as a laudatory sentiment by the FDIC.

            Heeding the outcry,
Congress introduced five measures by late March to kill the initiative. Also
running for cover were the plan's four sponsoring agencies--the FDIC, the
Federal Reserve, the Office of Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of
Thrift Supervision--which withdrew the proposal. Today, as the bank regulators
mop up the damage, two questions need to be asked: 1) What made the government
think the public would stand for such gross intrusions into their privacy; and,
more important, 2) doesn't the public know that banks already have KYC
powers?

            By law, all U.S. banks snitch on their customers, reporting
to federal regulators every currency transaction greater than $10,000. Between
10 million and 12 million such reports are filled each year. Against a backdrop
of fines and sanctions, banks must also report all transactions greater than
$5,000 whenever a financial institution believes that the information is
"relevant to a possible violation of law or regulation." This includes
unexplained transactions that are "not the sort in which the particular
customer would normally be expected to engage" or that have no "apparent lawful
purpose." About 50,000 of these reports are filed annually. The federal
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network aggregates the reports and makes them
available to 59 government agencies and to all U.S. attorneys. This databank of
unsubstantiated allegations can be maintained indefinitely and is routinely
accessed by law enforcement authorities, who often go fishing for financial
data. The information, however, only flows one way: Banks are prohibited from
disclosing to customers that they tattled to the government, and an act of
Congress shields financial institutions from liability suits. There is no
penalty for overreporting.

            Law enforcement
authorities describe these detailed reports as essential in their battle
against drug traffickers, terrorists, Medicare crooks, and embezzlers, as well
as international money launderers. The FBI reports that 98 percent of the 2,613
convictions for financial institution fraud won in 1998 were initiated or
enhanced by suspicious activity reports.

            Although Congress howled about KYC and damned the
regulators for snooping, surely the fury was mock. Federal and state
legislators have passed new bank surveillance laws with an almost biennial
frequency since the Bank Secrecy Act of 1970. Legislators even boast about the
new laws at election time to prove that they're tough on crime. In late 1998,
the House of Representatives prodded federal banking agencies to require
more bank surveillance by overwhelmingly passing a bill that would have
forced regulators to issue KYC rules for comment within 120 days

            Taking the hint, the Fed composed the model KYC
regulations on its own initiative last fall after two years of research. One of
the Fed's KYC innovations would have required banks to develop programs to
verify the identities of new customers. It suggested that banks make visual
checks of businesses and corroborate phone numbers by calling new clients under
the guise of thanking them for their business.

            After completing a preliminary draft of KYC, the
Fed rallied the three other sponsoring agencies to follow its lead. The FDIC
now says that it had serious reservations about the proposal, the very proposal
that it nearly shepherded into law. The agency insists that it published the
KYC in the Federal Register for comment--which is the way of all new
federal regulations--to accommodate the Fed and to standardize the banking
regulations.

            Ordinarily, new financial regulations generate a
few comments from members of the financial community, the odd professor or
attorney, and the occasional think tank. But KYC touched off protests across
the board. The American Bankers Association complained about "a new, vastly
more expansive burden of investigating all customers to determine if anything
illegal has taken place." The California Banking Association argued KYC would
deter millions of Americans from opening bank accounts. Privacy groups
protested that they had not been invited to help design the new regs.

            But it was the
grass-roots opposition to KYC, sparked in part by the Libertarian Party, whose
protest Web site steered 171,268 e-mail complaints from netizens to the FDIC,
that elevated the subject to the national agenda. Acknowledging that they had
lost the KYC battle but won the regulatory war, the sponsoring agencies made
this joint statement when they withdrew the KYC regulations at the House's
March hearings: "Over the past 15 years banking organizations and law
enforcement authorities have forged a vital partnership to fight financial
crime."

            To be sure, KYC would have encroached on financial privacy
just as sensitivities about the Internet and other new technologies have
increased demands for privacy. Now that financial data are compiled and stored
digitally, it is cheap, easy, and tempting for the government to cast a wider
and wider financial dragnet to build increasingly intrusive computer profiles
of citizens. Attention must be paid lest the government further encroach on the
privacy of our data streams.

            But the KYC flap is less about the loss of financial
privacy than it is about the public's loss of naiveté regarding the myth
of financial privacy. People want to believe that checking accounts are
sacrosanct, even though they haven't been for a long time. This spring, the
government bolstered the myth of financial privacy by cynically folding its KYC
hand when its regulatory methods and practices were noisily scrutinized.

            In fact, while KYC was dying a very public death it
was thriving in the shadows. Thanks to current banking regulations, more than
85 percent of U.S. banks currently maintain KYC programs. The Fed's Bank
Secrecy Act Examination Manual all but requires the adoption of "Know Your
Customer" programs. Banks not heeding this "imperative" are subject to cease
and desist orders and to financial penalties of thousands or millions of
dollars.

         
      
   
