
   
   
      
         
            Students Have Always Been Violent

            Judging by the histrionic Columbine massacre
coverage you'd think that children are by nature innocent, free of violent or
sexual thoughts until corrupted by our culture. That schools have traditionally
been safe. That the recent spate of killings is unprecedented.

            History says otherwise. In every era, American
schoolchildren--especially teen-agers--have been unruly and destructive. As
late as the 17 th century, those "children" we now call teen-agers
were considered adults. And preteens swore, drank, had sex, even dueled with
guns. If school violence wasn't a problem back then, it's only because few
children went to school.

            In colonial America, most young children were
taught at home. Those who attended school were just as prone to be disorderly
as today's youths. Teachers kept problem children in line with corporal
punishments that seem positively barbaric today: They tied children to whipping
posts and beat them or branded students for their crimes--a "T" for thievery, a
"B" for blasphemy. Occasionally children were put to death.

            Branding fell from favor
in the18 th century, but students were still flogged or tied to
chairs (for more on corporal punishment, click ). In the early 19 th
century, school reformer Horace Mann reported that he saw 328 floggings in one
school during the course of a week. As the principles of humanitarianism spread
and the era of mass schooling arrived, Mann and others replaced or supplemented
the elite academies with taxpayer-supported "common schools," which admitted
young students from all walks of life. (Later, attendance become compulsory.)
In the Gilded Age, as immigrants and migrants flooded the cities, public
elementary schools proliferated. Finally, the Progressives championed the view
of adolescence as a stage of childhood, and high schools (the first of which
opened in the 1820s) multiplied as well.

            It appears that more students meant more violence. In 1837,
Mann noted that almost 400 schools across Massachusetts had to be shut down
because of disciplinary problems. In most institutions, keeping order took
precedence over teaching. One observer in 1851 likened the typical American
school to "the despotic government of a military camp." In the colleges, where
the teen-age students were bigger and less docile, violence was even worse.
Princeton University, to take just one example, witnessed six major riots
between 1800 and 1830, including the burning of the library in 1802 and a rash
of campus explosions in 1823 that caused half of one class to be expelled.

            School violence persisted
into the 20 th century, taking different forms according to the
climate of the day. In politically charged times, students became violent in
the name of political causes. In 1917, for example, when New York City
introduced a "platoon" system to deal with an influx of pupils, students
rebelled--literally. Between 1,000 and 3,000 schoolchildren picketed and stoned
P.S. 171 on Madison Avenue and attacked nonstriking classmates. Similar riots
erupted across the city, resulting in furious battles between student mobs and
the police. Likewise, the civil rights movement and anti-Vietnam War protests
brought different forms of "political" violence to places ranging from Little
Rock Central High in Arkansas to Kent State University in Ohio.

            More politically sedate times didn't translate into student
acquiescence, however. In the post-World War II years, urban strife and
suburban anomie gave rise to school violence of the sorts broadly rendered by
Hollywood in the 1955 films Rebel Without a Cause and Blackboard
Jungle . The nation waxed hysterical over "juvenile delinquency," as the
vogue phrase had it--alienated adolescents unaccountably sullen in the
bountiful Eisenhower years. Though history had recorded public concern over
bands of violent teen-agers ever since the beginning of the republic, the fear
of "gangs" (a term coined in the 1930s) caught the nation's fancy. Time
magazine headlined a story, "Teen-agers on the Rampage," which detailed a
weeklong outbreak of violence in high schools from Maine to California.
Congress held hearings on the delinquency epidemic, calling comic-book artists
to testify about whether their drawings inspired children to violence.

            Youth rebelliousness
surged in the 1960s. While crime grew overall, juvenile crime grew faster.
Sociologists, social workers, and policy wonks turned their attention en masse
to offenses ranging from vandalism to gang-related crime, from drug use to
student-upon-student assaults. Schools implemented safety plans, bringing in
adult hall monitors and setting up bodies for hearing student grievances. Urban
schools hired professional security agents--and later adopted the surveillance
cameras, metal detectors, locker searches, and other measures more commonly
seen in prisons. But a major study conducted in 1978 confirmed what experience
had been teaching. Teen-agers were more likely to be victims of crime at school
than anywhere else.

            If student violence has now been a major concern for
decades now, what seems to distinguish '90s violence is the suburban- or
rural-school massacre. West Paducah, Ky.; Jonesboro, Ark.; Pearl, Miss.; Moses
Lake, Wash.; Springfield, Ore.; and now Littleton, Colo.--in each case, young
students, armed with guns, committed multiple murders in or near the school
itself. To be sure, similar atrocities have occurred in the past. In 1927, a
55-year-old school-board official detonated three bombs in the Bath, Mich.,
schoolhouse, killing 45 people. And to be sure, the string of recent killings
in fact reveals nothing, statistically speaking, about our society. Yet they
remind us that the number of children killed by guns skyrocketed in the '80s
and while tailing off in the '90s remains far higher than in decades past.
According to , the growing trend of violent altercations ending in death is
attributable "almost entirely" to the proliferation of guns among children.

            History makes it clear that children and teen-agers
are no strangers to violent impulses. There have always been, and always will
be, maladjusted or deranged students who unleash those impulses. That they do
so is inevitable. How they do so may be within our control.

         
      
   
