
   
   
      
         
            No. 203: &quot;Gloat, Little Gloat Worm&quot;

            
               Mattel, Al Gore,
Landry's Seafood Restaurants, and Cruel Intentions can all make the same
boast. What?
            

             

            by 5
p.m. ET Sunday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               

                  Thursday's Question (No. 202)--"Death Sentence?": Under pressure from
the Federal Trade Commission, R.J. Reynolds will add a single sentence to each
print ad for Winston. Saying what?
               

            

            "Banned
in California, but now qualifies as an assisted-suicide device in
Oregon."-- Daniel Radosh
            

            "Due to
interference from the Federal Trade Commission, R.J. Reynolds regrets to
announce that it will no longer include a free toy in every pack of
Winstons."-- Tim Carvell
            

            "No
cartoon camels were used in the marketing of this product."-- Matt
Sullivan ( Ian Henley and Kate Powers had similar
answers.)

            "These
fine tobacco products can be comfortably smoked through a tracheotomy
hole."-- Larry Amaros (similarly, Stephen Golub and Meg
Wolitzer)
            

            "Smoke
up: Delaware needs a new capitol building!"-- James Poniewozik
            

            Click
for more answers. 

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            After smoking a pack of Camels a day for a dozen
years, I gave it up in 1985. I still miss it. Cigarettes stimulate thought,
distract from woe, and require playing with matches. Cigarettes promote
intimacy: What could be sexier than sharing a smoke, passing that small fire
from hand to hand? Cigarettes impose form on your day; they are a means of
demarcation: You smoke one after something and before something else. And they
look so cool. I'd be smoking right now if it weren't for the part about the
hideous respiratory illness and coughing away my life in a painful and
protracted demise.

            I intend to resume the
habit as a delight of old age; my first Social Security check will just about
cover the cost of a carton. Smoking will offer a reliable indoor pleasure that
I can enjoy seated, much to be desired in my decrepitude. And malignancy
develops slowly. With a little luck, by the time I contract a fatal disease,
I'll already be dead. You'd think instead of messing around with Winston, RJR
would produce a brand it can market to old folks. Call it Golden One Hundreds.
Use the slogan: "Hey, Granny, feeling lucky?"

            
               Delightful Double
Negative Answer
            

            "No additives in our tobacco does not mean a safer
cigarette."

            Winston's "no bull" ads
proclaim that the cigarettes are 100 percent tobacco with no additives. RJR was
shocked--shocked!--to learn that some might interpret this as a health claim.
In the 18 months since the campaign began, Winston's market share rose from
4.86 percent to 4.93 percent.

            
               Sunday's Sermons in
Review Extra
            

            All preached yesterday in New York City; none
actually heard by News Quiz.

            "Better Than Evian" (Rev. Sharon Blackburn, Plymouth
Church of the Pilgrims, Congregational)--Promotional fee paid by Perrier. At
last, sacred product placement.

            "Thirsty?!" (Rev. Dr. Dale D. Hansen, St. Luke's,
Lutheran)--What would Jesus drink? Or the Rev. Sharon Blackburn?

            "Are There Any Rats in Your Cellar?" (Rev. Dr.
Thomas K. Tewell, Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church)--Either that's a metaphor
or the church has started a pest removal sideline.

            "The Divine Maitre d'..."
(Dr. J. Barrie Shepherd, First Presbyterian)--Would you ask the divine wine
steward what goes with rats? And send over a bottle of Perrier.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Winsomely toxic
products.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of Slate and will be
published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may
publish your name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
