
   
   
      
         
            Family Plots 

            The term "black comedy" has
become so elastic in the last few years that it now extends to entertainments
as various as Life Is Beautiful , in which Chaplinesque sentimentality is
juxtaposed with concentration-camp horror, and Lock, Stock & Two Smoking
Barrels , in which flyspeck louts machine-gun other flyspeck louts with
farcical haplessness. Somewhere in the middle comes my ideal black comedy, in
which humans are base but their emotions have weight, and the human condition,
while irremediable, is leavened by the artist's cheery sleight of hand. A great
black comedy should be palatable but hard to digest, slipping easily down the
gullet and then sticking in the gut. The form is currently represented by an
unheralded, low-budget jewel called Six Ways to Sunday , directed by Adam
Bernstein from a script he wrote with Marc Gerald. Its young protagonist, Harry
Odum (Norman Reedus), a fry-cook in the postindustrial wasteland that is
Youngstown, Ohio, lives with a shut-in mother, Kate (Deborah Harry), who has
contrived to keep him in a state of sexual ignorance. A breathy ex-prostitute
now going to seed, she bathes Harry, controls the light in his room, and warns
him off relations with "sluts" while hovering inches from his face in low-cut
nighties. Harry's a walking Freudian time bomb.

            Invited by his buddy
Arnie (Adrien Brody), a Jewish boy with garish rapper affectations, to help
collect a debt for a mobster from the proprietor of a sex club, Harry finds
himself bombarded by images of topless women and unable to keep from whaling on
a man they came only to threaten. "I hope I killed him," he says, when pulled
from the man's bloody, broken body. And then: "I hope I didn't kill him."
Seasoned criminals love to exploit such youthful intensity, and Harry is soon
adopted by Abie "The Bug" (Peter Appel) and then by his boss, Varga (Jerry
Adler), Jewish gangsters in search of a more dependable bully boy than the
chaotic Arnie. Bringing Harry along means teaching him how to dress and spend
money ("Having money and not flashing it is strictly for gentiles," they
explain); treating him to a whore (Anna Thompson), whom he reluctantly accepts
and then pays not to have sex with ("Do I seem normal with girls? Sexually?" he
asks); and presenting him with a huge switchblade, which Harry is shortly
expected to plunge into the heart of a man he has never met.

            S ix 
               Ways to Sunday is freely based on the
1962 novel Portrait of a Young Man Drowning , by Charles Perry, an
African-American playwright and performer who died of cancer before completing
a second book. Set in Brooklyn, Perry's novel (which features white characters)
is bleaker than the film, less archly distant, with a nastier ending. Bernstein
and Gerald have made it their own. The movie's slapstick and brutality inhabit
the same psychological landscape, and Harry's acts of violence are viewed in
stroboscopic flashes, held long enough to convey their garishness but so
fleetingly that you might giggle at your own uncertainty: Did he really do
what I think he did? I hesitate to use the word "offbeat," which has come
to describe a metronomical quirkiness that's as predictable as anything on the
beat, but here the surreal touches are sprung without overture, like frogs that
just happen to be hopping across the screen. Harry is dogged by a phantom
slickster, Madden (Holter Graham), who leers at women and then demonstrates how
to molest them. Is it Madden who's attacking Varga's Hungarian maid Iris (Elina
Lowensohn), or is Madden a stand-in for Harry? Iris is a tiny yet imposing
thing (Lowensohn was Dracula's daughter in Michael Almereyda's 1994 movie
Nadja ) with a game leg; it was her "affliction," says Harry, later, that
was the source of his attraction. "That's why I was attracted to you ,"
she replies, prompting a look of puzzlement. Here, as elsewhere, Reedus is
remarkable, his face both masklike and porous, so that you never consciously
register the ways in which Harry is dissolving before your eyes--but you're not
in the least surprised when he does.

            Deborah Harry is no
actress--her speaking voice is as dead as her singing voice is glassy. But Kate
is meant to be zonked and zombielike, a Mummy Dearest, and this bedraggled
ghost of a glamorous icon is startlingly potent. Those cheekbones seem to
stretch from one side of the screen to other--they hold up Harry's features,
which might otherwise collapse. The director underlines the tension between her
past and present by using the Blondie song "Sunday Girl" in a tender encounter
between Harry and Iris in a diner. At first I questioned the wisdom of that--it
seemed a little cheap. But Bernstein has brought off a coup, making Kate a
literal presence in that scene and reinforcing Deborah Harry's stature. It's
even a coup that Harry's mom is played by a Harry--the incestuousness extending
to their very names.

            My first professional movie reviews were written in 1982 at
the weekly Boston Phoenix under the tutelage of Stephen Schiff, then a
magisterial film critic as well as an exacting editor. Presented with a
sentence containing two adjectives in succession ("Jason Tiddlywinks gives a
funky, severe performance"), Schiff would say, "Choose one." "Well, gee, I
dunno, the performance is funky but also kinda severe so you kinda need both."
"Choose one," he would repeat. Squirming, I would direct him to eliminate an
adjective and then Schiff, after a respectful beat, would strike the other.
Where adjectives are concerned, there's no substitute for tough love.

            Now that Schiff has
become a big-deal screenwriter (his Lolita generated scads of ink and
his adaptation of True Crime , directed by and starring Clint Eastwood,
opens next week), it's as if those last 17 years didn't happen. I'm sitting
here trying to choose one or another adjective for his newest script, The
Deep End of the Ocean --an exhausting task because I'm genuinely of two
minds about the picture. I want to say it's subtle, but I also want to say it's
heavy-handed. I want to say it's incisive, but I have too many problems with
its psychological elisions to let it off the hook. Based on a novel--one of
those Oprah best sellers--by Jacquelyn Mitchard, it's the story of a mother,
Beth Cappadora (Michelle Pfeiffer), whose 3-year-old son vanishes in a hotel
lobby. The first section of the film dramatizes the apparent kidnapping and its
agonizing aftermath. Then, after nine years in which Beth and her husband, Pat
(Treat Williams), achieve a queasy normalcy with their remaining two children,
a 12-year-old boy (Ryan Merriman) shows up at their door offering to cut their
lawn for money. Is it? Could it be? (I hope I'm not spoiling anything--all this
is in the film's coming attractions.)

            The first part of The Deep End of the Ocean is
powerful all right but, given this kind of material, that isn't much of an
achievement. And I'm not sure what Whoopi Goldberg is doing there as a lesbian
detective with about as much verisimilitude as Goldberg's 500-year-old alien
bartender on Star Trek: The Next Generation . But in the nebulous middle
section, the movie develops layers, and Schiff and director Ulu Grosbard
achieve something extraordinary: They dramatize the undramatized--the latent.
When an actress such as Patricia Arquette presents a blank face to the camera,
it's really blank, but Pfeiffer's blankness can make you seasick with its
sloshing, stormy underpinnings. Williams gives off glints of suppressed
violence and, as the couple's older son, Jonathan Jackson has a queer
affectlessness that signals something roiling underneath. The family's fake
equilibrium creates a tension that's nearly unbearable, and when the front door
swung open and that boy stood there it was all I could do to keep from jumping
out of my seat.

            But the movie grows
increasingly frustrating. The kid, we learn, was taken by a woman crazy with
the loss of her own baby and then raised, after her suicide, by a big-hearted
guy called George (John Kapelos), who had no knowledge of his adopted son's
true origins. So the Cappadoras' elation at the return of their son is
gradually eroded by the realization that their boy still thinks of George as
his real father. But how are we to take the evident inability of Beth and Pat
even to address the subject of the boy's nine years with another couple or
their bland expectation that he'll nestle himself into the family bosom as if
he'd never left? Are they supposed to be so shallow, so uncurious, so
dim? It's hard to tell, since so much has been left off-screen--including a
climactic discussion between the boy and his stepfather that triggers the
film's absurd ending.

            There's another aspect of Mitchard's narrative that bugs
me, although here my reasons are entirely personal. As someone born to a mother
in her first year of medical school and a father in his third, I was--with
great regret--placed in the care of grandparents for the first years of my life
and later reclaimed before my third birthday. Hundreds of thousands of dollars
in psychiatric bills later, I can speak about this with limited objectivity;
the point is that, although very young when taken from my primary
caregivers--my grandparents--I recall both the joy of my years with them and
the hellish trauma of separation more vividly than much of what happened to me
last week. I risk boring you with my autobiography to buttress my contention
that The Deep End of the Ocean is fundamentally bogus. I don't buy that
Sam, in his fourth year at the time of his snatching, would, less than a decade
later, have no recollection of the parents and siblings with whom he'd spent
the first three, and that only the aroma of a cedar chest would rekindle faint
memories of his warm life among the Cappadoras. I find it absurd that he could
ever have settled into life with his new family (especially a certifiably crazy
mother) with no scars, growing into a happy, snub-nosed, uncomplicated
adolescent instead of, say, the delusional momma's-boy assassin of Six Ways
to Sunday --or, for that matter, a vaguely unstable wannabe movie critic.
People differ, of course, and there might be ways to account for Sam's
surprising evolution, but they're not in the novel and they're certainly not in
the movie.

         
      
   
