
   
   
      
         
             Advise and Consent (Also Obstruct, Delay, and Stymie)

            Five months ago, the U.S.
Sentencing Commission achieved something remarkable. Chairman Richard Conaboy
resigned, leaving the seven-member commission with exactly zero members. Since
then, President Clinton has nominated no one to fill the empty seats. The
commission still has more than 100 employees, $9 million to spend, and no
authority at all over federal sentencing policy.

            Nor has the president
nominated anyone to replace China Ambassador Jim Sasser, who returns home in
May. According to MSNBC and the New York Times , at least six gray
eminences, including former Rep. Lee Hamilton, former National Security Adviser
Anthony Lake, and former Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman John Shalikashvili,
have turned down the job. The president did manage to send the Senate Richard
Holbrooke's nomination as U.N. ambassador in February, eight months after the
previous U.N. delegate left and eight months after Clinton announced he would
nominate Holbrooke. Not that Holbrooke will be taking office any time soon:
Sen. Jesse Helms, R-N.C., refuses to schedule a confirmation hearing for him
till the administration agrees to Helms' U.N. reform package.

            Holbrooke, at least, will get a hearing someday. In
February, the president again nominated Bill Lann Lee as assistant attorney
general for civil rights, a nomination the Senate has refused to consider for
the past two years. Judiciary Committee Chairman Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, says
he won't hold any hearing on Lee's nomination.

            The appointments process
is a perennial source of indignation for goo-goos. Even so, it seems
particularly grim these days. There are different explanations for the various
holdups above--the sentencing commission is empty because Democratic and
Republican senators failed for months to compromise on a slate of nominees;
Holbrooke's nomination was delayed by an almost-but-not-entirely meritless
ethics charge; the Beijing job is difficult to fill because no one wants to
defend Clinton's China policy to Senate Republicans, etc.--but together they
suggest a process that is astonishingly screwed up.

            The time it takes presidents to confirm nominees has soared
in recent years: On average, it took Clinton more than eight and a half months
to confirm his initial appointees, up from five months for Ronald Reagan and
less than three for John Kennedy. According to ranking Judiciary Committee
Democrat Sen. Pat Leahy, D-Vt., it now takes more than 260 days for the Senate
to confirm a federal judicial nominee, up from 183 days in 1996 and only 86
days in 1994. One judge waited more than three years for confirmation. It takes
eight to 10 months for the average ambassadorial nomination to be approved. The
administration is overflowing with unconfirmed "acting" officials. A 1998
survey found that "acting" officials hold about 20 percent of jobs reserved for
presidential appointees.

            Some of this mess is to be expected. Filling
positions is always a hassle during the last years of a two-term presidency: No
one wants to chuck a good career for a lame-duck job. And a divided government
inevitably slows confirmations: Republican senators are more skeptical of
Clinton appointees than Democrats are.

            But the screwiness of
the process runs deeper, and almost everyone in Washington deserves a share of
the blame. Clinton, especially early in his term, has taken endless months to
nominate candidates for critical executive branch and judicial openings. The
confirmation process has become massively politicized. "Elections no longer
settle anything," says Colby College Professor G. Calvin Mackenzie, the leading
authority on the appointments process. "What used to be the norm--that the
president wins the election and appoints his people--is no longer. Now the
losing party continues to fight through the appointments process."

            All Cabinet-level appointees are now fair game for a
confirmation challenge. The deference the Senate used to grant sub-Cabinet
nominees is vanishing, too. Senators have increasingly deployed secret "holds"
to delay confirmations, often for reasons having nothing to do with a nominee's
qualifications. Helms, for example, held up numerous ambassadorial appointments
to pressure Clinton to reorganize the State Department. Committee chairs also
refuse to schedule confirmation hearings: Helms (again) derailed William Weld's
nomination as ambassador to Mexico by refusing to let Weld testify. The
confirmation process is "nasty and brutish without being short," as Anthony
Lake quipped after his nomination as CIA director went down in flames.

            The number of
presidential appointees has multiplied--including judges, there are more than
4,000, five times as many as in Kennedy's time--making it difficult for the
Senate to find time to consider everyone. Cumbersome ethics rules have made
simply accepting a nomination onerous: Health and Human Services Secretary
Donna Shalala had to pay accountants $20,000 just to complete her financial
disclosure forms. Nominees usually have to give up their lucrative law
practices and businesses as they await confirmation, a sacrifice that leaves
them without income for months or years.

            It was not always this way. Until the late '60s, the Senate
was deferential to the (many fewer) presidential nominees. It did much more
consenting than advising. Abe Fortas' 1968 nomination as chief justice of the
Supreme Court, which Republicans delayed to death, marked the first sign of
change, but Robert Bork's 1987 Supreme Court nomination truly ushered in the
era of appointments warfare. Since Bork, partisan interest groups and
grandstanding senators have freely challenged even obscure nominees.

            You can make a case that
the appointments mess is more aesthetic than substantive. The Senate, after
all, is apparently nearing a compromise on the sentencing commission, and the
president will likely nominate seven new commissioners in the next few weeks.
Holbrooke's U.N. nomination may be iced by Helms for a bit longer, but everyone
agrees that he will be confirmed. The administration will find a China envoy.
Lee has already been serving as acting assistant attorney general for 14
months. If the Senate refuses to hold a confirmation hearing, he will continue
in that acting job till the end of Clinton's presidency. These are the
exceptions: Most nominees are confirmed smoothly. And whether or not all the
right jobs are filled with exactly the right people, the United States still
manages to negotiate with China and the United Nations, the civil rights
division still manages to file cases, and judges still manage to impose
sentences.

            But the rising obstructionism does damage government.
Presidents, who are elected to remake executive policy, find themselves
hamstrung. Career civil servants act in place of unconfirmed presidential
appointees. The career folks are unwilling and unable to impose the policy
changes the president may want. The president often skirts the law by
appointing "acting" officials who "act" for years (such as Lee), depriving the
Senate of its constitutional right to approve appointments. The eternal
shortage of judges means that some cases are adjudicated peremptorily. The
president--and this has been especially true of Clinton--frequently nominates
the least offensive nominee rather than the most qualified in order to pacify
the Senate. The endless obstacles to confirmation deter the best candidates:
According to Mackenzie, the presidential personnel office must frequently offer
a job to its fourth or fifth choice because the top candidates don't want to
endure the inconvenience.

            The goo-goos would cut the number of presidential
appointments by a third or more, lessening the burden on the Senate and
allowing the president to pick better candidates. They would eliminate
senatorial holds. They would simplify background investigations and financial
disclosures. These are promising and admirable ideas--modest solutions to a
modest problem. Appointment and confirmation is a political process, and like
any political process it will always be messy. But it doesn't have to be
this messy.

         
      
   
