
   
   
      
         
            Soft-Core Tai Chi

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Entrapment
                (20 th Century Fox). A few
critics like this old-fashioned heist flick starring Sean Connery and Catherine
Zeta-Jones despite its unoriginality: "It works because it is made stylishly,
because Connery and Zeta-Jones are enormously attractive actors, and because of
the romantic tension between them" (Roger Ebert, the Chicago Sun-Times ).
A slew of critics finds the whole thing a bit off: Connery has 40 years on
Zeta-Jones, and the highlight of the film is Zeta-Jones' spandex-clad
"demi-soft-core tai chi" (Joe Morgenstern, the Wall Street Journal ) as
she attempts to evade an optical security system in the process of ripping off
a priceless gold mask. 
                  Slate
               's David Edelstein says
"Entrapment is an A-list production, but despite ... a bevy of
state-of-the-art sensors, cybergizmos, and digital readouts, it can't manage to
brush off its B-movie cobwebs." (Read the rest of Edelstein's review .)

            

               
                  The Winslow Boy
                (Sony Pictures Classics). David Mamet
directs a G-rated family drama, based on Terrence Rattigan's 1946 play about a
schoolboy accused of petty theft and the legal battle that blossoms in the
accusation's wake. Critics praise Mamet's departure from his trademark profane
and sharp-edged films, but the reviews have a dutiful air about them: "a
pointed examination of the price of seeking justice" (Kenneth Turan, the Los
Angeles Times ) ... a "handsome, stately adaptation" (Janet Maslin, the
New York Times ). (Click to read the consensus view by

                  Slate
               's David Edelstein: "Beat by beat, Mamet turns
out an immaculately staged, crisply paced, and elegantly acted movie. It's also
a tad bloodless, but you can't have everything.")

            

               
                  The Phantom Menace
                (20 th Century Fox).
Though the premiere is still two weeks away, hype for the Star Wars
prequel is at full throttle. The soundtrack has been released, tie-in toys have
gone on sale (1,500 shoppers showed up at FAO Schwarz's Manhattan store on
Monday morning), thousands of Web sites have cropped up, and lines have formed
at theaters. The backlash has also arrived: Janet Maslin complains in the
New York Times : "When a film becomes the nexus of such a complex
marketing juggernaut, inevitable consequences include weariness and even déjà
vu. Nobody on this planet will be able to approach the Star Wars
prequel, The Phantom Menace , with a sense of discovery. So much commerce
rides on this product, so much advance flogging has been necessary, that the
film's own innate appeal is compromised." (Two well-maintained fan sites,
The Force.net and
Countdown to
Star Wars , present detailed information on the film as well as
photos and news on upcoming commercials. The film's official site offers several trailers
and an online store.)

            

               Music
            

            

               
                  Keep It Like a Secret
               , by Built to Spill (Warner
Bros.). Excellent reviews for the latest album from the Idaho-based indie rock
band. Reviewers praise singer and lead guitarist Doug Martsch as the locus of
the band's appeal: His "particular genius ... is the vivid tension he generates
between earnest romanticism and howling discord" (David Fricke, Rolling
Stone ). Reviews compare the band's sound with predecessors as diverse as
Wire, Hüsker Dü, and Lou Reed, and several mark the similarity of Martsch's
voice to Neil Young's. The Wall Street Journal 's Jim Fusilli writes that
it's "the kind of disk you replay when it rolls to a close, just to delight in
all that cleverness once again." (For more on the band, check out this site, which has
photographs, lyrics, and a list of tour dates.)

            

               Book
            

            

               
                  The Lexus and the Olive Tree
               , by Thomas L. Friedman
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux). Early reviews lavished praise on the New York
Times "Foreign Affairs" columnist's study of globalization: "The author
uses his skills as a reporter and analyst to conduct a breathtaking tour, one
that possesses the exhilarating qualities of flight and the stomach-hollowing
ones of free fall" (Richard Eder, the New York Times ). Recent reviews
have been considerably cooler. Gripes: 1) Friedman's belief in global economics
and American-style capitalism's ability to solve the world's ills reads more
like cheerleading than analysis: "[O]nly a New York Times foreign
affairs columnist could write a book so relentlessly upbeat about the USA's
prospects in an ever more tightly integrated world without being accused of
unsophisticated boosterism" (David J. Lynch, USA Today ). 2) Some of his
theories have already been disproved: His "Golden Arches" theory of
international relations held that no two countries that both had a McDonald's
have ever gone to war. This "was proved false even before his book's
publication date by the war between NATO and Serbia (where the Belgrade
McDonald's franchises were promptly vandalized)." (Jacob Weisberg,

                  Slate
               ). 3) Friedman is blind to the negative aspects of a world
dominated by business instead of government: "The lack of skepticism toward
business--the tendency to adopt its view of the world--has had a deeper effect
on Friedman than just causing him on occasion to strike a tonally false note,"
writes Nicholas Lemann in The New Yorker , because "in the era of
globalization business can constrict freedom and innovation just as governments
did during the Cold War." (Click to read Weisberg's review in

                  Slate
               .)

            

               Snap Judgment
            

            
               Movie
            

            

               
                  Idle Hands
                (Columbia Pictures). Another campy teen
horror flick. Shocker: Critics say it's trite and unoriginal (it follows a boy
with a demonically possessed hand). It's also "undeniably kinetic," and
director Rodman Flender (yet another WB alum) manages to generate "watchable
levels of splatter-happy delirium" (Owen Gleiberman, Entertainment
Weekly ).

            

               Offspring
            

            

               Bechet Dumaine Allen. Woody Allen and Soon-Yi Previn are in
possession of a child, "Bechet Dumaine Allen." The critics are dying to know:
Is the 5-month old girl adopted or not? Previn "didn't appear pregnant in
recent photos" (Shauna Snow, the Los Angeles Times ). The name comes from
legendary soprano saxophonist Sidney Bechet. 

         
      
   
