
   
   
      
         
            No. 218: &quot;You Smell Something?&quot;

            

               "It stinks in God's nostrils, and I know it stinks in the law's
nostrils, and it stinks to me." Who said this about what?
            

            by 5
p.m. ET Sunday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Wednesday's
Question (No. 217)--"Unlisted":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        Up until Tuesday, Texan Robert White was No. 4
on a list of 3,600. What's the list and how did he get off
it?
                     
                  
               
            

            
"Contemporary plagues, according to the new Renewal Movement haggada. White,
who won a spot on the list two years ago in a Tikkun contest, was
dropped along with smog, imperialism, people who spit on the subway, and 972
others in an effort to make the Seder 'not quite so long, for a change.'
"-- Daniel Radosh
            

            "The
Rickey Ray Rector memorial execution list for tough-on-crime governors seeking
to be president. Like Rector (of Arkansas), White is also brain-damaged, so he
gets the chair."-- Norm Oder
            

            "List
of 'worst-dressed Texans.' He got off the list by turning in his taffeta chaps
and getting leather ones instead."-- Jon Hotchkiss
            

            
"People magazine's 'Sexiest Murderers Alive' list, which he got off of
by getting offed."-- Peter Carlin ( Tim Carvell had a similar
answer.)

            "People
who've sold George W. Bush cocaine, danced with him naked as a frat prank, or
got good and puking drunk with him in a whore house. Or, oh yeah, helped him
move a body. I'd say more, but let's wait until he wraps up the
nomination."-- Chris "Contact Your Pastor for a Copy of My Videotape That
Proves Everything" Kelly
            

             

             

             

             

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Stock cars, trailers,
racism, and guns--no, not the answers to the four questions in the Theme Seder
I attended last night, but what we know about Texas. We also know football, a
narrow yet passionately held definition of manhood, and a cynical and
ill-educated governor who'll do anything to achieve even higher office. But if
you put "Texas" in the question, you get Texas in the answer. On the other
hand: Had he given us the Dallas Cowboys but not given us beer can hats to wear
to the game ... Dayanu !

            
               Randy's Not
Technically Part of the Wrap-Up
            

            The day four cops are
arraigned on murder charges in the Amadou Diallo shooting, the mayor, with
characteristic sensitivity, holds a ceremony to rename a city plaza for a
policeman. That's the routine part. But a few hours later, in a frivolous bit
of mutual assistance that involves declaring it "Out-of-Towners Day" to promote
the just-remade Neil Simon movie--oh, yes, they're remaking Neil Simon
movies--who's at city hall giggling and simpering with the mayor: Steve Martin.
You know: the playwright, the New Yorker author, the ... you think of
the word.

            
               Final
Answer
            

            The list comprises people awaiting execution,
arranged by time spent on death row; White was removed from the list by lethal
injection.

            Robert White was on death
row from Aug. 26, 1974, for killing three people with a stolen machine gun and
stabbing a fourth, a gun collector. Only three men, two in Georgia and one in
Florida, have been awaiting execution longer. White's final words were: "Send
me to my maker, warden."

            
               A Personal Moment
With David Finkle
            

            I agree with your father
about the No Time for Sergeants saluting-toilets scene. I have always
loved it. I loved it when I read the novel; I loved it when I saw the Broadway
adaptation; I loved it when I saw the movie; I continue to love it. Truth is, I
have always enjoyed toilet humor. It's my curse and my triumph.

            
               April Is the
Cruelest Extra
            

            If you like your tax tips innovative, your
conspiracy theories baroque, and your anti-Semitism classic, you can't beat the
Posse Comitatus
Web site. Their take on Kosovo: "jewish orchestrated MURDER of White Christians
using the armed forces of the U.S and others under the cover of NATO!" Their
take on U.S. politics: "THE RACIST JEWISH MAFIA CONTROL AMERICA 100%!" And yes,
there is a transcript of the Anti-Defamation League hosted "Second Centennial
Meeting of the Learned Elders of Zion." Also impressive are the dozens of links
under "Jew
Watch: Keeping a Close Watch on Jewish Communities &
Organizations."

            One subcategory, "Jews on Stage, Screen, Musicians,
Artists, Writers, etc.," lists hundreds of names along with capsule comments,
an odd melange of minutiae, misinformation, and admiration so befuddling it's
tough to tell if the list was assembled by -phobe or -philo Semites. I quote a
few without comment.

            

               Jakob Dylan--lead singer of The Wallflowers and son of the great Bob
Dylan

               Steve Lawrence--singer, skeptic, husband of Edie Gorme

               Keith Moon--The Who (Reputedly Jewish)

               Tony Parisi--of the Village People (cowboy)

               Elvis Presley--Jewish maternal grandparent

               Marcel Proust--Second most important writer (after Kafka) this century

               Robert Redford--Actor. Describes himself as "half Jewish"

               Mark Reizen--Great Russian bass, "probably the greatest bass voice Russia
ever produced"

               Joan Rivers--Comedian/writer/jeweler/actress

               Adam Sandler--A GUY THAT WRITES SONGS FOR COOL
JEWS!

            

            Surely it's assembled
with a goofy sort of ethnic pride, but once it's on the Posse Comitatus site,
does that matter?

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Bush ambition.

         
      
   
