
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  True
Crime
                (Warner Bros.). Clint Eastwood, in his 21 st
directorial effort, is a decrepit newspaper reporter rushing to save an
innocent man on death row. The A-list critics who usually puff the star offer
only bland praise this time. The film is "assembled ... with loving care," says
Michael Wilmington in the Chicago Tribune . It's "a wickedly effective
thriller," writes the Chicago Sun-Times ' Roger Ebert. And the New
York Times ' Janet Maslin finds it a "quietly poignant ... involving
thriller." The naysayers toss spit wads. The film is "a hopelessly cliched
newspaper yarn--I kept waiting for someone to scream into the phone, 'Baby, get
me re-write!' " (Chris Kaltenbach, the Baltimore Sun ). Says Kenneth
Turan in the Los Angeles Times : "It's a gritty story made in the
director's more elegiacal mode, a confusion of style and content that is not in
the film's best interests." No one comments on the movie's most notable
feature: that here Eastwood crusades on behalf of a character he would have
summarily dispatched, vigilante style, in previous films. (Check out David
Edelstein's 
                  Slate
                review ; and read a review of Eastwood's
Mission Ranch Restaurant in Carmel, Calif., here.)

            
               
                  The King and
I
                (Warner Bros.). This animated effort kiddifies the classic
Rodgers and Hammerstein musical. The Chicago Sun-Times ' Ebert says the
themes about defying class and convention don't work: "kids aren't much tuned
into that." Trying to make the story interesting, the creators ladle in wacky
animals, an evil royal counselor, and a hot-air-balloon action scene--and
refuse to let the king die in the end! The result is "an above-average
Saturday-morning TV show," says Kaltenbach in the Baltimore Sun . The
animation gets mixed reviews: "The cartoon characters' faces and body language
aren't doing much of an acting job," says the New York Times ' Anita
Gates. To Robert Koehler in Daily Variety, the animation "is a curious
hodgepodge of awkward human movement, tired nature effects and fine painterly
backgrounds and detail work." (Discuss the real version of the musical with other stage
nuts in the "forum" at Musicals.net.)

            
               
                  Forces of
Nature
                (DreamWorks SKG). Reviews for the Ben Affleck-Sandra
Bullock romance are all over the place. Some like Affleck, some like Bullock,
others like neither. The soppy plot (wedding-bound strait-laced guy gets
waylaid by wild girl) produces severely mixed reaction as well. Turan in the
Los Angeles Times is captivated: Besides being "smartly written" and
"directed with a lively intelligence," the film "has several surprises in its
repertoire, and most--but not all--of them make this a most pleasant and
diverting venture," he says. The Village Voice isn't buying the
overuptight Affleck: "You can't have screwball comedy if only one party
desperately wants to screw," writes Justine Elias. Richard Corliss in
Time hates the whole thing: "Well, it had to come sometime: this is
DreamWorks' first reprehensible fiasco." A subtext to the reviews is outrage at
the ending, which critics try not to give away but still bridle at. "Forces
of Nature is less about the anarchic powers of love and sex than it is
about the bond between a man, a woman, and two nonrefundable, first-class
airline tickets," concludes Elias. Ebert is beside himself: "It's not even
clever enough to give us the right happy ending. It gives us the wrong happy
ending," he writes in the Chicago Sun-Times . (The Affleck
Store--part of the official Affleck site--has to be seen to be
believed.)

            

               Television
            

            
               The
Oscars (March 21, ABC). Raspberries for Whoopi Goldberg's hosting
performance at the 71 st Academy Awards. Reviewers say she wasn't
funny and spent too much time congratulating herself. Los Angeles Times
TV critic Harold Rosenberg scored her "gratuitously coarse language and
one-liners, and cheap political jokes." The Boston Globe 's Jay Carr hit
Goldberg's habit of being her own best audience: "Goldberg spent too much time
laughing at her one-liners (often, she laughed alone)." Otherwise, everyone
expressed dismay at the epic, record length (four hours plus) and a dance
number strange even by Oscar standards (it included what were apparently
interpretive steps to World War II), but marveled at Roberto Benigni's
irrepressible speeches and Shakespeare in Love 's upset win. Second-day
stories in the Los Angeles Times and New York Times let the
Hollywood establishment lash out at Miramax capo Harvey Weinstein, who had the
temerity to take the Best Picture Oscar away from Steven Spielberg.
"[Weinstein's] costly promotional campaigns ... had paid off more handsomely
than expected," writes Bernard Weinraub in the New York Times . The big
spending is seen both as the roots of Shakespeare 's win and as
portentous of Normandy-scale campaigns on everyone's part next year.
(Everything you wanted to know about the Oscars is here.)

            

               Book
            

            
               
                  Years of
Renewal
               , by Henry Kissinger (Simon & Schuster). Henry
Kissinger, who was not , gets hosannas for the third volume of his White
House memoirs. These were the boring Ford years, but Kissinger is given credit
for masterful analysis, trenchant characterizations, and vivid storytelling. In
an almost prostrate review on the front page of the New York Times arts
section, Richard Bernstein writes, "Mr. Kissinger's history of his own time in
office is a work whose breadth, clarity of vision and historical scope amply
justify its size. It is an event, a likely classic of its genre." Kirkus
Reviews agrees: "A brilliant, masterly, even seminal book." The Wall
Street Journal puts things a bit more into perspective: " 'Years of
Renewal' is an engrossing book, truly hard to put down, at least for
aficionados of U.S. foreign policy," writes Josef Joffe. (You can read
Time 's excerpt here.)

            Find a
movie playing near you on Sidewalk.com.

            

               Recent "Summary Judgment" columns
            

             

            

               
                  
                     Movie--
                  
                  The
Deep End of the Ocean ;

               
                  Movie--
                  The
Corruptor ;

               
                  Movie--
                  The Rage: Carrie
2 ;

               
                  Movie--
                  Wing
Commander ;

               
                  Death-- Stanley Kubrick;

               
                  Book--
                  Black Hawk Down: A
Story of Modern War , by Mark Bowden.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie -- Analyze This ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Cruel Intentions ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Lock, Stock & Two Smoking
Barrels ;

               
                  Book -- Monica's Story , by Andrew Morton;

               
                  Theater -- Annie Get Your Gun ;

               
                  Theater -- Bright Lights, Big
City .

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  8MM ;

               
                  Movie -- 200 Cigarettes ;

               
                  Movie -- The 
                  Other Sister ;

               
                  Book--
                  The Houdini Girl , by Martyn Bedford;

               
                  Book -- Perfect Murder, Perfect Town , by Lawrence
Schiller;

               
                  Theater--
                  Not About Nightingales .

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  October Sky ;

               
                  
                     Movie --Jawbreaker ;

               
                  Movie -- Office Space ;

               
                  Music--
                  The Hot Rock , by Sleater-Kinney;

               
                  Book--
                  Traveling Mercies: Some Thoughts on Faith ,
by Anne Lamott;

               
                  Book -- The Elegant Universe: Superstrings, Hidden Dimensions, and
the Quest for the Ultimate Theory , by Brian R. Greene.

            

         
      
   
