
   
   
      
         
            <I>The Phantom Menace</I> Strikes Back!

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  The Phantom Menace
                (20 th Century Fox). A
trickle of praise for The Phantom Menace after the first wave of
negative reviews. The film "offers a happy surprise: it's up to snuff," writes
Janet Maslin in the New York Times . "[T]he Star Wars franchise
was funnier and scrappier when it was new. But it simply wasn't capable of
this." The Chicago Sun-Times ' Roger Ebert awards the film 3 1/2 stars.
Peter Travers' generally negative review in Rolling Stone concedes that
the movie is "loaded with cool stuff" and that "in terms of visual
sophistication ... Lucas ranks with the masters." The majority continues to
slam the film. Gripes: 1) wooden acting, 2) bad dialogue, 3) confusing plot, 4)
weak storytelling. (Click for a synopsis of last week's negative reviews and to
read David Edelstein's review of the film in 
                  Slate
               .)

            

               
                  Notting Hill
                (Universal Pictures). Adoring early
reviews for this Julia Roberts-Hugh Grant romantic comedy that many critics are
calling Four Weddings and a Funeral , Part 2. Both films were written by
Richard Curtis and both cover the same turf--Grant falling for a ravishing but
distant American woman--in this case Roberts, who stretches to play ... a
skittish Hollywood megastar. Entertainment Weekly 's Lisa Schwarzbaum
calls the film "blithe and exhilarating," and Time 's Richard Schickel
calls it "utterly charming--and very smart." (Click here for a
Roberts fan site, here for a Grant fan site, or here for information on
the London neighborhood where the film is set.)

            

               Music
            

            

               
                  Jesse & the 8 th Street Kidz
               ,by Jesse
Camp (PGD/Hollywood). Critics are surprisingly kind to MTV VJ Jesse Camp's
foray into the world of rock. The sound is equal parts glam, punk, and metal,
and features Cheap Trick guitarist Rick Nielsen. Rolling Stone gives it
three stars and says "believe it or not, his album is a genuinely rocking
detention-room blowout, a spew of motormouthed microwaved teen rebellion
upholding the noble legacy of Twisted Sister" (Rob Sheffield). Many, though,
find the album as irritating as Camp's goofy on-screen presence and call it
"ersatz rock--all guns and poses" (David Browne, Entertainment Weekly ).
(Find out more about Jesse here.)

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  Woman: An Intimate Geography
               , by Natalie Angier
(Houghton Mifflin). Reviews--published and killed--of New York Times
science writer Angier's feminist exploration of women's biology stir up a
journalistic controversy about conflict of interest. After the Times
published a review by Marilyn Yalom in its daily review slot calling the book
"dazzling," the Boston Globe reported that Angier had positively
reviewed Yalom's A History of the Breast two years ago. Also, the
Times ' Sunday book review section killed a second review of the book, a
negative one by theorist Helena Cronin. Book Review Editor Charles
McGrath defended delivering the spike to Cronin's piece: "I didn't like the
tone of the review--I thought it was too snarky. ... And I thought the review
failed to address the whole range of the book." Cronin told the Globe
that Angier's book was "totally idiotic. ... [S]he was so wrong-headed in the
areas where I knew the science that, even if there were areas where she might
have been correct, I could no longer trust her." After killing Cronin's review,
the Sunday Times ran a gushing review of the book ("it is a tour de
force, a wonderful, entertaining and informative book"--Abraham Verghese). But
the paper also apologized for violating the Times ' conflict-of-interest
policy by assigning the book review to Yalom in the first place. Back to the
book: Other publications give it a warm response--Joan Jacobs Brumberg writes
in the Washington Post that Angier "eviscerates two ... old saws: that
hard science must be boring and that feminists have no sense of humor." Other
reviewers are put off by Angier's ecstatic, florid prose. (Read the first
chapter here [requires free registration].)

            

               
                  Music for Torching
               , by A.M. Homes (Rob Weisbach
Books). Mainly positive reviews for Homes' latest novel, which, like her other
work, is designed to outrage: A corporation man gets genital tattoos, a bored
suburban couple burn down their house on a whim, etc. Dissenters find the
novel's transgressive bent a touch stale, but the pack praises it. The
Westchester, N.Y., setting makes the story read like "Cheever country on crack"
(Norah Vincent, the Boston Globe ). "People will be talking about this
one" ( Kirkus Reviews ). (Read an excerpt of the novel here.)

            

               
                  The Girls' Guide to Hunting and Fishing
               , by Melissa
Bank (Viking). The critics love this collection of interconnected stories of a
woman who navigates the worlds of love and dating from the age of 14 to the age
of 35. "[F]ast and funny with real moments of poignancy" (Yahlin Chang,
Newsweek ) and "one of those rare occasions when a highly touted book
fulfills the excitement" ( Publishers Weekly ). Some critics detect shades
of the single-gal dippiness of Bridget Jones's Diary , but most say that
this is much more witty and sophisticated. (Francis Coppola has hired Bank to
write a screenplay of the book.) An overtly negative review in the New York
Times Book Review , by Courtney Weaver, calls the tone "self-consciously
humorous"; says the wit at times "disintegrates into cutesy one-liners"; and
complains that the stories are plagued by a "certain generic weariness."
(Read one of
Bank's stories, "The Worst Thing a Suburban Girl Could Imagine.")

            

               Snap Judgment
            

            
               Movie
            

            
               
                  Love
Letter
                (DreamWorks). Kate Capshaw (a k a Mrs. Steven Spielberg)
stars in a so-so romantic comedy about an older divorced woman whose life is
changed by the discovery of a love letter. It's plagued by "bland dialogue and
dull sitcom acting," writes the New York Times ' Stephen Holden.

         
      
   
