
   
   
      
         
             Was Bob a God?

            Americans--at least those who own stock--have not
only endorsed the infallibility of the markets, they have also endorsed the
infallibility of the people who watch over those markets. Federal Reserve
Chairman Alan Greenspan was long ago elevated to divinity. And Treasury
Secretary Robert Rubin, who announced his resignation today, has joined
Greenspan in the pantheon of Money Gods. (There are no atheists in bull
markets.)

            For the past few years, but especially since rumors
of his departure began circulating this spring, Rubin has been bathing in media
slobber. He has been credited with eliminating the deficit, captaining the U.S.
economy through seven fat years, vanquishing the Asian financial crisis,
transmuting base metals into gold, and generally doing eight impossible things
before breakfast.

            Does Rubin deserve this sanctification? Is there,
in fact, anything wrong with Bob?

            As with Greenspan,
Rubin's godliness rests on a foundation of genuine accomplishment. In 1993,
Rubin was one of several Clinton advisers who urged deficit reduction rather
than economic stimulus. This tightfistedness set the table for the current
boom, leading to low interest rates, job growth, the Wall Street explosion,
etc. Since then, Rubin's cautious advice has helped ensure that the
administration did nothing to screw up the prosperity. Rubin lobbied for NAFTA
and GATT. His friendly relations with Greenspan--a dramatic contrast to the
Bush administration's squabbling with the Fed--has soothed bankers and
investors. His deft manipulation of the debt ceiling during the 1995-96
government shutdown prevented a U.S. default and guaranteed that the political
war between the president and the Republican Congress would not derail the
thriving economy.

            And as a conservative Wall Street veteran in a White House
of Democratic political operatives, Rubin brought market credibility to the
Clinton administration, reassuring the New York money folks that Washington
would not go loopy on them. Perhaps the most compelling evidence of Rubin's
accomplishment may be, perversely, Wall Street's yawn at his resignation. The
Dow dropped more than 200 points on the news, then gained most of it back
within the hour. This is testament to Wall Street's faith that Rubin has been
so successful that the White House won't dare change his pro-market
policies.

            But Rubin's deification
is not simply the result of having done a good job. Who hasn't done a
good job during the past few years? His reputation depends on style as much as
substance. In a Republican administration, Rubin would be another gray suit,
another dull rich guy moonlighting as a politician. But Rubin has been blessed
with a boss and colleagues who make him look good by comparison. Clinton is
emotional, loud, chaotic, horny, and enveloped by Monica sleaze. Rubin is
ascetic, controlled, rational, quiet, and untouched by any of the zillion
Clinton scandals. During Flytrap and since, Rubin's chilliness has been a
welcome adult relief from the childish president.

            In a more democratic Democratic administration, Rubin's
wealth--estimated at $125 million or more--would have made him suspect. But
among the Clintonians, it has burnished him. He seems the Cincinnatus of
Washington: Unlike the political types around him, he has proved himself in
another arena. He doesn't need the power and prestige of Washington and feels
no compulsion to claw his way up. This is rare among D.C. pols. Having been
assigned the role of the Amateur Politician, Rubin seems pure next to the
sleazy pros. (He is not, of course, an amateur. Click for an example.)

            Rubin has another rare
quality. He does not seek press coverage, and when he is covered, he speaks
with blandness in order not to make news. This silence impresses those
who cover him: Compare the media's worshipful treatment of Rubin with its scorn
of publicity-seekers such as Housing Secretary Andrew Cuomo or Treasury
Secretary-designate Larry Summers, Rubin's longtime deputy. Rubin's reticence,
as well as his praise of underlings and colleagues, has earned him an enormous,
though not fully deserved, reputation for humility. "This humility stuff is
nonsense," says a former White House colleague of Rubin's. "He does not need to
elbow others out of the way and brag, but it's not because he's humble. It's
because he is totally confident."

            Rubin subtly enhances his own reputation for perfection by
talking frequently about his imperfections. In interviews, he repeatedly
emphasizes the uncertainty of his job. He describes to reporters how he focuses
on weighing and reweighing percentages until he makes the best possible
decision in ambiguous circumstances. This is a fine way to make decisions, as
Rubin has proved, but it is an equally good way to protect your image. If a
decision turns out well, it's because you calculated it would. If it turns out
badly, it's not your fault: You made the most rational choice you could.

            Rubin agnostics will be
glad to learn that there are two weak spots in his record. He arrived in
Washington as a supposed champion of the poor. He was expected to use his
position as head of the National Economic Council and later as treasury
secretary to redirect federal resources toward inner cities and the underclass.
But Rubin's cautiousness has got the better of him. Although he strongly
disagreed with the welfare reform bill, he didn't battle hard to prevent
Clinton from signing it. And instead of lobbying for large-scale anti-poverty
or urban revival programs, Rubin settled for mini-government: small efforts to
prod banks to extend credit in troubled neighborhoods, micro-loan programs to
encourage entrepreneurship among the poor. In Rubin's defense, his stewardship
of the economy has done more to help the poor than any federal grant program
could have.

            The secretary has also been excessively obeisant to Wall
Street. Though Rubin has bucked Wall Street by opposing a capital-gains tax
cut, he comes from Wall Street, and most of his closest friends and advisers
are Wall Streeters, and he generally heeds the street. During the global
financial crisis, Rubin has halfheartedly warned Americans not to invest
cavalierly in weak foreign economies, but anytime foolhardy American investors
have been threatened, Rubin has rushed to save them. During the Asia, Russia,
and Brazil crises, Rubin constructed bailout deals that benefited outside
creditors above all. He insists he was not trying to help Wall Street.
According to Rubin's logic, safeguarding investors in these troubled economies
prevents contagion from spreading. If American investors thought they were
going to lose the billions they had unwisely put in Korea, they might pull out
of Latin America, Eastern Europe, or the rest of Asia.

            But many economists, especially non-Americans,
complain that Rubin has been far too obliging toward his old colleagues and
indifferent to the poor Russians and bankrupted Koreans damaged by his
decisions. (After all, when Wall Streeters say today that the Asia crisis is
"over," what they mean is that American exposure is over. The economies of Asia
are still a mess.) Rubin's relief for Americans has encouraged a "moral
hazard"--an inducement for people to speculate excessively because they know
the United States will rescue them.

            The regulatory capture of Rubin by Wall Street has
not only benefited Wall Street, it has also polished Rubin's reputation. When
Rubin makes decisions that aid Wall Street, analysts and traders reciprocate in
the financial media, telling CNBC, the Wall Street Journal, Bloomberg,
et al., just how wise the good secretary is. Rubin himself probably does not
care about such back scratching, but it is a lesson that heir-apparent Summers,
an eager press hound, has surely absorbed. Be nice to Wall Street, and perhaps
you can be a money god, too.

         
      
   
