
   
   
      
         
             Monomoney Mania 

            A couple of days ago my CW
alarm starting buzzing furiously. For something like the sixth time in a month,
a businessman I was talking to had just declared, in the tones of someone
stating a profound insight, that the modern world economy no longer has room
for scores of different national currencies--that the inexorable logic of
globalization will soon force most countries to adopt the dollar, the euro, or
the yen as their means of exchange. This particular speaker was Latin American,
and was clearly influenced by the recent discussion of "dollarization" as a
solution to his region's woes, but I have heard pretty much the same line from
Asians and Europeans. No doubt about it: A new conventional wisdom has emerged.
And you know what that means: It's time to start debunking.

            At first sight, it might
seem obvious that the fewer currencies there are, the better. After all, a
proliferation of national moneys means more hassle and expense, because you
keep on having to change money and to pay the associated commissions. It also
means more uncertainty, because you are never quite sure what foreign goods are
going to cost or what foreign customers will be willing to pay. And as
globalization proceeds--as the volume of international transactions rises, both
absolutely and relative to world output--the cost of having many currencies
also rises. So why not have fewer--maybe only one?

            There's also the matter of speculation. The financial
crises that have shaken much of the world all started, at least in the first
instance, with investors betting that the currency of the afflicted nation
would fall in value against harder currencies such as the dollar. Why not spoil
the speculators' game by giving them nothing to speculate about--by replacing
pesos and reis with portraits of George Washington (or, if you happen to be
European, with generic pictures of bridges and gates--for more on European
currency design, see 1997 
                  Slate
                piece)?

            But not so fast. There
are still some very good arguments for maintaining separate national
currencies. Not only that, while globalization and technological change in some
ways are pushing the world toward fewer currencies, in other ways they actually
reinforce the advantages of monetary pluralism.

            The classic argument in favor of separate national
currencies, with fluctuating relative values, was made by none other than
Milton Friedman. (One appealing aspect of this particular debate is that it
cuts across the usual ideological lines. European socialists like unified
currencies, so does the Cato Institute. American liberals like floating
exchange rates, so do Thatcherites.) Friedman started from a more or less
undeniable observation: Sometimes changing market conditions force broad
changes in the ratios of national price levels. For example, right now the
Irish economy is booming and the German economy's sputtering. Clearly, prices
and wages in Ireland need to rise compared with those in Germany. Now, you
could simply rely on supply and demand to do the job, producing inflation in
Ireland and deflation in Germany. But even a free-marketeer such as Friedman
realized that this is asking a lot of markets and that it would be much easier
to keep German prices stable in German currency, Irish prices stable in Irish
currency, and let the exchange rate between the two currencies do the
adjusting.

            Friedman offered a
brilliant analogy. He likened exchange rate adjustment to the act of setting
clocks forward in the spring. A truly devout free-market believer should--if he
is consistent--decry this as unwarranted government interference. Why not leave
people free to choose--to start the working day earlier if and only if they
feel like it? But in reality there is a coordination problem. It is hard for
any one business to shift its work schedule unless everyone else does the same.
As a result, it turns out to be much easier to achieve the desired time shift
by leaving the schedules unchanged but resetting the clocks. In the same way,
Friedman argued, a country whose wages and prices are too high compared with
those abroad will find it much easier to make the necessary adjustment via a
change in the value of its currency than through thousands of changes in
individual prices.

            So there is a trade-off. You don't want too many
currencies--you wouldn't want to have separate dollars for Brooklyn and Queens.
But when two countries are subject to strong "asymmetric shocks"--which is
econospeak for saying that if they shared a common currency one would sometimes
be in a boom while the other was in a slump and vice versa--there is a good
case for their having separate currencies whose relative values are allowed to
fluctuate. The question, then, is whether changes in the nature of the world
economy have altered the terms of trade-off--and if so, in which direction.

            Now the increasing volume
of international trade and investment does, other things being the same, make
it more costly to maintain multiple currencies. But other things are not the
same, and other forces arguably make the optimal number of currencies in the
world larger rather than smaller.

            Consider, in particular, the effects of modern information
and communication technology--which may also be the driving force behind
globalization. Surely that technology has made it easier, not harder, to deal
with a world of many currencies. For example, European advocates of a single
currency used to delight in pointing out that if you took a grand tour of the
European Union, starting with 100 deutsche marks and changing your money into
local currency at each stop, at the end you would have only something like 40
marks. This was always a bit of a red herring, since the commissions that
businesses pay on foreign exchange transactions are far smaller than the fees
at foreign exchange kiosks. But anyway, who needs to change money nowadays?
When I go to Europe, I pay for most things by credit card and get petty cash
from local ATMs, which are happy to accept my BankBoston card.

            Information technology
also makes it easier for businesses to deal with the risks associated with
fluctuating currencies. It has always been true that such risks could in
principle be "hedged" away through ; the problem was that the necessary markets
were sometimes thin or nonexistent. Thanks to computers, however, investment
banks now offer a vast array of financial instruments, and hedging has become
much easier.

            I can't resist mentioning a related issue. When you talk to
euro enthusiasts, they invariably claim that one of the great benefits of the
new currency will be "price transparency." Once all European prices are quoted
in euros, it will be obvious to consumers when a German company is charging
more than its French competitor or vice versa--whereas it wouldn't be if the
prices were quoted in francs and marks and had to be converted at the going
exchange rate. This claim always puzzles me: Here we are in the information
age, able to process gigabytes of data with a single mouse click--but we
imagine that people can't multiply and divide?

            The one remaining question is that of currency
speculation--fear of speculators, not the desire for efficiency, is what has
led Argentina to talk seriously about replacing pesos with dollars and made
dollarization at least a topic of discussion elsewhere in Latin America. But
while currency speculation may have had disastrous impacts in some countries,
in others letting the currency drop seems to have been just what the doctor
ordered. Australia's floating dollar has apparently allowed the island
continent to sail almost unscathed through the Asian crisis. Even in Brazil it
appears that fears that a drop in the currency would bring back hyperinflation
were unwarranted. And to me, Argentina and Brazil both look a lot like
Australia: resource-rich nations a long way from anywhere, with no dominant
Northern Hemisphere trading partner. Economic logic suggests that in the long
run such countries, if they can put their inflationary histories behind them,
have no business adopting the currency of a faraway country which will not take
their interests into account.

            So let's recognize this current enthusiasm for
currency unification as what it is: an intellectual fad, not a deep insight. I
say let a hundred currencies bloom. Well, maybe 20 or 30.

         
      
   
