
   
   
      
         
            No. 243: &quot;A Crush on You&quot;

            
               "All great leaders
since Moses have known that feared enemies must be crushed completely." Who
served up this baloney on Sunday, to inspire whom, to do what?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Tuesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's
Question (No. 242)--"Reading Is Fundamentalism":
            

            

               
                  Kicking off a $7 million ad campaign, gospel singers, children,
and evangelists poured out of a giant copy of The Book , an updated,
"cool" version of the Bible. But, says The Book 's promoter,
televangelist and former presidential candidate Pat Robertson, "Our goal is not
to sell Bibles. It is to make Bible-reading cool and American." Participants
are invited to devise other ways to achieve that goal.
               
            

            "The
cover of every Bible to bear the sacred inscription 'As seen on TV!'
"-- Barry Crimmins
            

            "Add a
few verses to Revelations describing how to make a pipe bomb."-- Paul
Tullis
            

            
"Clarify that all references to the Holy Trinity are meant to indicate Alan
Greenspan, Robert Rubin, and Lawrence Summers."-- David Duncan
            

            "Find:
'Shalt not.' Replace with: 'Shalt.' Replace all."-- Dale Shuger
            

            "Sin,
schmin: It's kegger time!"-- Tim Carvell
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            My favorite detail is
the TV commercial where they pour out of the giant Bible. That's $7 million
worth of cool right there. From Gulliver's Travels to my scout troop's
walk through the Heart Room at Philadelphia's Franklin Institute, grotesque
shifts in scale have always been funny, particularly when a little thing is
made big enough to walk into. Amusing roadside Americana is basically a bad
restaurant in the shape of a big chicken. (With an added dash of cruelty--you
sit in a chicken and eat a chicken. Kind of rubbing it in.) The converse,
however, is not true: A big thing made tiny is not comic; it's cute, a
dollhouse, a teddy bear, a bonny wee Boris Yeltsin no bigger than your
thumb--he can ride to the Duma on the back of a mouse, if he's not too drunk.
The distinction blurs a bit in Fantastic Voyage , the movie where Raquel
Welch was part of a medical team shrunk to microscopic size and injected into
the body of some guy with a brain tumor. It's more scary than funny, especially
to the brain tumor guy when he finds out that his chief surgeon is Raquel
Welch.

            
               Amen
Answer
            

            Doug Knox, of publisher Tynedale House, says,
"The Book looks friendlier than your typical leather Bible. It's got a
cool title, contemporary package design and clear-reading, single-column
type."

            The leather Bible--isn't
that by de Sade?

            
               Small Problem
Follow-Up
            

            On Monday an ad for yet
another penile
enlargement clinic ran in the New York Times . I believe the masthead
now displays the slogan "The newspaper of record and small penises."

            
               Movies That Don't
Feature Adam Sandler but Should Extra
            

            Title: Done That ... Changed My Ways .

            Produced by: An "Emmy Award producer."

            Produced for: SEX RESPECT: The world's leading
abstinence education program

            Official Summary:

            
               This heart
warming true story will reach teens with two powerful messages: first, save sex
for marriage; secondly, if you have made the mistake of engaging in pre-marital
sex, you can change your ways. The film features Corey Edelman, lead guitarist
for the popular band NIV, and his fiancé Vorey Secor, a full time student.
Corey's goal was to remain a virgin and save sex for marriage. In fact, he
graduated from high school never kissing a girl or drinking alcohol. But a
snowboarding accident that nearly killed his mentor sent Corey into
rebelliousness. At a party where he got drunk, Corey lost his gift of virginity
to a girl he didn't even know. Vorey had a different past. She became sexually
active at 13, and engaged in a heart breaking cycle of sexual activity. Both,
who hated what they did, resolved to change their ways by embracing SECONDARY
VIRGINITY ... the practice where teens stop engaging in pre-marital sex, and
wait until marriage. One teen remarked, "I never understood Secondary Virginity
until I saw this film. Corey's really cool, and I related to him."
            

            
               Unanswered
Questions
            

            

               What kind of mentor rides a snowboard? Some kind
of frozen Yoda?

               What kind of parents name a daughter "Vorey"?

               If you were named "Vorey," wouldn't it compound your problems to marry
someone named "Corey." (Hi, we're Corey and Vorey!)

               Secondary Virginity--isn't that some appalling
operation the Taliban forces on women as an alternative to being stoned to
death?

            

            
               Cool Movie
Merchandise
            

            T-shirt--Don't Be Dips, Stop at the Lips, $15.

            Button--Pet Your Dog, Not Your Date, $1.

            Sticker--I'm Worth
Waiting For, $5.

            
               T-Shirt Slogan
They Don't Use, but Should
            

            Front: "I'm never having sex ... "

            Back: "... with Adam
Sandler."

            Web site: http://www.sexrespect.com/default2.html

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Replace prayer and salvation with a vulgar slogan
and a cheap giveaway.

         
      
   
