
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist
               
               , March 20
            

            
               (posted Saturday,
March 20, 1999)
            

            The cover story says the United States needs to realize
that Chinese espionage is inevitable. A bigger source of Sino-American trouble
is export promotion: U.S. presidents should quit hawking goods to China,
because that trade policy conflicts with foreign policy. The "Lexington"
column advocates a consistent U.S. policy toward
China, warning that separation of powers allows the legislative and executive
branches to broadcast different messages. (Lexington also praises House Foreign
Relations Committee Chairman Christopher Cox "for his cheerful refusal to be a
hack or a firebrand.") ... An editorial bids adieu to the old model of European integration
premised on an omnipotent central bureaucracy. In addition to being
scandal-ridden, the European Commission has squandered its policy-making powers
to the point of irrelevance.

            
               
                  New
Republic
               
               
                  , April 5, 1999
            

            
               (posted Friday, March
19, 1999)
            

            The kindly cover profile
of Bill Bradley says he might seriously challenge Al Gore for the 2000
nomination as the "the candidate of political reform and moral reawakening."
The article credits the Democratic underdog with: the 1986 Tax Reform Act,
prescience regarding the American high-tech boom, earnestness, an "active
social conscience," and "political individuality." Bradley believes Gore is
compromised by his association with administration scandals. ... An
article argues that abortion is here to stay because it is "an indispensable
part of the middle-class toolkit." Despite the fact that two-thirds of
Americans have moral misgivings about abortion, expediency overpowers
"traditional morality." Pragmatic Republicans (e.g., George W. Bush) understand
this. ... "TRB" faults Clinton's moral reasoning in apologizing for
American assistance to repressive Guatemalan regimes. The broader goals of the
Cold War required the United States to make common cause with oppressive
governments. Rather than issuing mea culpa s, Clinton should declassify
intelligence archives so citizens may judge for themselves if the United States
is guilty.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine
               
               , March 21
            

            
               (posted Thursday,
March 18, 1999)
            

            The fascinating cover
story traces the path of anti-abortion activist Jim Kopp, the suspect sought in
the fatal shooting of abortion provider Dr. Barnett Slepian. Kopp began as a
"prayerful defender of life" but became an "any means necessary" fanatic. The
piece explores the radicalization of anti-abortion extremists, who have moved
from Operation Rescue's nonviolent principles to the Army of God
Manual , which instructs activists on violent action. The violent strategy
may be achieving its goal: Between 1992 and 1996, the number of hospitals,
clinics, and physicians performing abortion declined 14 percent. ... A
profile wonders whether Charlie Rose can translate his discursive PBS charm to
60 Minutes II , where he's now a correspondent. The article asserts that
Rose's success at 60 Minutes II depends "on his ability to relinquish
those very qualities that make him interesting and distinctive": his "harried,
stumblebum" style. ... An article focuses on the rebuilding of the
Levi's brand, which has lost the youth market since the early '90s. Levi's
decline is attributed to the "paradigm shift" toward baggy over tight and the
failure of Levi's to retail directly to a new generation of consumers who
experience shopping as entertainment. Levi's hopes to rebound by subtly
infiltrating youth culture: sponsoring Lauryn Hill concerts, posting flyers,
chalking sidewalks, and airing Errol Morris-directed commercials during
Dawson's Creek .

            
               
                  Vanity
Fair , April 1999
            

            The annual Hollywood
hype issue is as immense (414 pages) and gushy as usual. The meatiest feature
chronicles how Columbia Pictures chief Harry Cohn squelched the romance between
Sammy Davis Jr. and Kim Novak to avoid adverse publicity. The mob, reportedly
acting on Cohn's behalf, threatened Davis with violence to force him into a
sham marriage with a fellow African-American. ... 
               VF
retreads the story of the industry war between Creative Artists Agency and
upstart Artists Management Group. The battle started last summer when prodigal
mogul Mike Ovitz rode back into town, founded AMG, and proclaimed his intention
to reinvent "the architecture of the industry." The piece explains the
institutionalized tensions between agents and managers, and suggests that Ovitz
is off to "a strong start," having already lured away industry "crown jewels"
such as Leonardo DiCaprio and Cameron Diaz. ... Plenty of
Hollywood glamour photos: The cover triptych shows the usual fresh crop of
movie idols to-be. (Never heard of them? Neither have we.) Virtually everyone
who's anyone is depicted in an inside portfolio: Drew Barrymore ("The Nymph"),
Sean Connery and Michael Caine ("The Old Devils"), Jodie Foster, Michelle
Pfeiffer, and Meg Ryan ("The Three Graces"), etc.

            

               
                  Time
                
               and Newsweek , March 22
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, March
16, 1999)
            

            
               Time 's cover story is Bill Gates' 12-step program for "succeeding in
the digital age." Revelations: Use e-mail (No. 1) and not paper (No. 5). There
is much jargon: "3. Shift knowledge workers into high-level thinking." One
sidebar wonders why Gates doesn't mention the
antitrust trial in his new book and urges Microsoft employees to "slap their
boss with a digital reality check." Another suggests that Gates is making lavish "investments" in
the Republican Party as "insurance" against a legal defeat. ...

               Newsweek 's cover story calls Joe DiMaggio "our first modern media star"
and "the loneliest hero we have ever had." The story predictably applauds his
achievements on the field and sighs over his difficulties off it.

            
               Time 's sprawl
story sensibly points out that planning and zoning are inherently local issues
not national ones. Nevertheless, national politicians (notably Al Gore) are
feasting on the issue, which a pollster calls "startlingly on track with
voters." ... 
               Newsweek prints a snippy interview with Russian Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov,
currently visiting the United States in search of International Monetary Fund
backing. If he is refused, he says, "Russia will not perish." ... Also
in Newsweek , Nation Editor Victor Navasky rails against Elia Kazan's Oscar for Lifetime Achievement.
The only fair way to give Kazan the award, he says, is to "print the names he
named on the back of it." (For more on Kazan see "" in

                  Slate
               .)

            
               
                  U.S. News
& World Report
               
               , March 22
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, March
16, 1999)
            

            The cover
story surveys the "E-Mail Nation," addressing cyberstalking, office
politics, and online literacy. Conclusion: E-mail's potent mix of intimacy,
anonymity, and speed is reshaping American life. One surprise: The elderly are
among e-mail's most dedicated practitioners; although initially daunted by
technological bells and whistles, they find solace and community online.
... A piece describes Minnesota's new abortion-reporting
regulations. The rules, which were pushed by pro-lifers, require doctors to
complete a 10-point checklist detailing why the patient wants an abortion, list
the patient's method of payment, and record the total number of abortions they
perform. ... An article details the Navy's effort to recruit new sailors and
retain old ones by establishing on-board "wellness" programs, which include
counseling, personal fitness training, and free 15-minute facial massages.

            
               
                  The New
Yorker
               
               , March 22
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, March
16, 1999)
            

            A piece calls the
killing of Amadou Diallo by New York police officers more explicable than last
year's beating of Abner Louima. Whereas Louima's beating was a premeditated,
unprovoked act of barbarism, Diallo's killing stemmed from street-crime
patrols, where heavy suspicion of blacks is inevitable, if unlawful. ...
A piece says the first hair dye ads of the '50s ("Does she or doesn't she?"
"Because I'm worth it") were seminal declarations of female self-determination.
New hair color offered women "an immediate and affordable means of
transformation." ... An article describes trendy new wrinkles in Brooks
Brothers' previously starchy marketing techniques. The original fount of
preppiness has been reduced to deploying an army of image-makers to reclaim
customers from faux WASP competitors such as Ralph Lauren.

            
               
                  Weekly
Standard
               
               , March 22
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, March
16, 1999)
            

            The editors eviscerate
the Clinton administration's China policy and mock the notion of a strategic
partnership with Beijing: "Presumably, if we don't engage this landmass, it
will fall on us." ... The cover story, titled "The Gospel According to
George W. Bush," narrates his transformation from sinful wretch to fervent
believer and his carefully phrased supplications to the Christian right.
... A piece challenges recent findings that mothers don't harm their
children's development by working as an "affront" to those moms who stay home
or work out of necessity. The study will make it even more difficult for
mothers to take time off from work to raise children.

         
      
   
