
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist
               
               , March 27
            

            
               (posted Saturday,
March 27)
            

            The cover editorial calls NATO's bombing of Serbia one of
the West's "riskiest ventures." The action sets a dangerous precedent by
attacking a sovereign state for suppressing an ethnic minority with
secessionist aspirations. Its strategy is faulty: Member countries are
reluctant, Serbia is strong militarily, and NATO has forsworn the use of ground
troops. And it's unrealistic to think that NATO can halt ethnic cleansing
without destabilizing the region. ... An article says President Clinton waited too long to
prepare the American public for military action in Kosovo. He procrastinated
because there were reservations within his own party and administration about
the wisdom of humanitarian intervention. ... A survey of Brazil reports that President Fernando Cardoso's
order to let the real float, which was issued from a bathroom at Rio's
international airport, deepened the recession and worsened inflation. Now that
fiscal austerity and higher interest rates have been imposed a more prosperous
country could emerge so long as Brazilians stay committed to reform.

            

               
                  Ms.
               
               , April/May 1999
            

            
               (posted Saturday, May
27, 1999)
            

            The feminist magazine
relaunches with articles on subjects predictable (female candidates for
president, abortion clinic violence) and less so (adultery, the benefits of
eating soy). ... A patient narrates her face lift. At first, she feels
like "female goods in a dick-driven market," but a few weeks later finds her
smoother, younger face a source of pleasure and confidence. ... A photo
essay, "In Praise of Women," features shots of impoverished or oppressed women
in Afghanistan, Africa, and Haiti, with lushly worded captions. ("Though worlds
apart geographically, we are all sisters in our souls.")

            
               
                  New
Republic
               
               
                  , April 12
            

            
               (posted Friday, March
26, 1999)
            

            A cover book review
warns that America is not prepared for the surge in its elderly population.
Policies and social custom encourage early retirement, subsidized by government
programs. As the percentage of seniors increases, these programs will dominate
the federal budget. Increasing savings and reinventing retirement as a mix of
leisure and work could alleviate the looming crisis. ... An article
argues that feminists and conservatives share the same misguided view of gender
relations: that women are pervasively victimized by society and need special
protection. In fact, American society is more flexible than feminists and
traditionalists recognize: Most women manage to have a "workable balance of job
and home responsibilities."

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine , March 28
            

            
               (posted Thursday,
March 25, 1999)
            

            The cover story by
Times columnist Thomas Friedman argues that the United States must
designate itself as enforcer-at-large of global stability. This role is
mandated by history (it's a natural extension of the melting-pot tradition),
economics (America stands to gain most from globalization), and necessity (no
one else can). ... A lawyer asserts that "spermination"--the
increasingly common practice of impregnating women with sperm retrieved from
comatose or dead partners--should be banned. (One bioethicist "has coined a
term for this new kind of father: the sperminator.") Like rape and forced
abortion for women, spermination invades bodily privacy and denies reproductive
choice.

            
               
                  The
Nation
               
               , April 5
            

            
               (posted Thursday,
March 25, 1999)
            

            The special showbiz
issue on "the relation between Hollywood and Washington" features stars
ruminating on politics and politically minded writers commenting on film.
Oliver Stone says that both making movies and running for office are too
expensive. Alec Baldwin blames Clinton's impeachment on "the deep, deep shame
that Republicans since [Watergate] have pretty much been synonymous with."
Writers name their mostly predictable favorite flicks: John Edgar Wideman goes
with Hoop Dreams and Larry Flynt picks The People vs. Larry Flynt
("I was very moved by it"). But Edward Said chooses Five Easy Pieces .
... An editorial warns feminists excited about Elizabeth Dole's
presidential run to remember "the Margaret Thatcher rule: A tough broad can
lead a developed nation and do nothing to improve the status of women or
children."

            
               
                  New
York
               
               , March 29
            

            
               (posted Thursday,
March 25, 1999)
            

            The cover
story exposes homophobia on Wall Street. Though some of Wall Street's
leading lights are gay, the industry is still "a testosterone-drenched frat
house complete with ritual hazing." Closeted bankers and brokers lie about
their extracurricular lives; out (and outed) peers suffer insults, wage
discrimination, and demotions. Few gay Wall Streeters are willing to risk their
positions to challenge the status quo. An exception: A top securities executive
who was fired when he requested health benefits for his partner is now suing
his old firm for $75 million.

            

               
                  Time
               
               and

               
                  Newsweek
               
               
                  , March 29
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, March
23, 1999)
            

            The newsweeklies offer history lessons. Time
profiles "the greatest scientists and thinkers" of the past 100 years, the
latest installment in its yearlong celebration of 20 th century
heroes. Among the chosen are Albert Einstein, Sigmund Freud, and Jonas Salk. In
his assessment of Orville and Wilbur Wright
               
                  ,
                Bill Gates says they
made the airplane "the World Wide Web" of their era. Robert Reich opines that
John Maynard Keynes ' theory of government spending "saved
capitalism." The inventors of the television, the computer, and plastics make
the list, as do more provocative choices: Ludwig Wittgenstein and Jean Piaget . Newsweek 's cover chronicles "2000 Years of Jesus." Belief in Jesus, "the
dominant figure of Western culture," has redefined the relationships between
living and dead, individual and society, and men and women. In a sidebar , a conservative pundit urges the religious right to
withdraw from partisan politics, comparing today's Christian politicians to the
religious teetotalers who passed Prohibition in a misguided attempt to regulate
morality. "The vision of worldly power is a distraction," he warns.

            
               Time reports
that George W. Bush is renovating his father's kitchen Cabinet for himself,
enlisting the youngest, most libertarian, and most idealistic of President
Bush's former White House advisers. "The revenge of the deputies," an older
aide calls it. ... 
               Newsweek 
               berates Madeleine Albright as "a cold warrior caught in the
wrong decade." Her absolutist policy style, formerly lauded, is now deemed
reactive, inconsistent, and ill-timed. See The New Yorker below for more
Albright bashing.

            
               
                  U.S. News
& World Report
               
               
                  , March 29
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, March
23, 1999)
            

            The cover story,
"America's Best Graduate Schools ," suggests which graduate
schools readers should attend, but then asks if they should enroll at all. The
expansive job market makes young people increasingly hesitant to trade their
robust starting salaries for tuition debt and library toil. There are few
surprises on the lists: Harvard is top medical school, Yale is top law school,
Stanford is top business school. ... Vice President Gore's aides
blame their boss' sorry poll numbers on the same strain of
"vice-presidentitis" that afflicted the early days of George Bush's 1988 run.
The good news: Gore's fidelity to Tipper has never been questioned. Gore wants
his campaign team to resemble a Web site, where "each person links to many
different areas." ... The magazine reports on the bawdy race to conceive the first baby of the
year 2000. Events for the all-important first week of April: A radio station in
New Zealand erected tents for a 20-couple "togetherness" session, an Auckland
station is shelling out for hotel rooms for fecund contenders, and European
cable is broadcasting programs on the mating rituals of lions and chimps.

            
               
                  The New
Yorker
               
               
                  , March 29
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, March
23, 1999)
            

            An unflattering profile
of Madeleine Albright asserts that the State Department's influence has waned
under her watch and also suggests that she intentionally withheld information
about her Jewish heritage. Twice prior to her 1997 public revelations, Albright
had contact with people and documents telling of family members' religion and
deaths at Auschwitz. ... A piece calls academia's recent embrace of
pornography a cheap thrill. From college courses to journal articles, the newly
respectable field of porn studies evinces the ivory tower's desperate need to
seem cutting edge. ... An article describes the bitter war between the
superposh Inn at Little Washington and the residents of the bucolic Virginia
town where it is located. The townspeople find the proprietors invasive and
insufferably haughty; the owners, in turn, call the locals homophobes and
rubes.

         
      
   
