
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Listomania
            

            

               
                  Slate
               's readers name the era's silliest books.

            New York University's
journalism department recently bade adieu to the millennium by picking the
20 th century's 100 greatest pieces of
journalism . NYU's ranking of Jonathan Schell's 1982 book The Fate of
the Earth --an overheated and self-edifying prophesy of nuclear disaster--at
No. 59, inspired Michael Kinsley to 
                  Slate
                readers in naming the
century's 100 Silliest Books Taken Seriously (By Serious People).

            Although we received a wide variety of entries,
consensus emerged around these eight books and authors, in this order:

            1. The Greening of America , by Charles
Reich

            2. Earth in the Balance , by Al Gore

            3. The Bell Curve , by Richard Herrnstein and
Charles Murray

            4. Das Kapital , by Karl Marx

            5. The Population Bomb , by Paul Ehrlich

            6. The End of History , by Francis
Fukuyama

            7. Mein Kampf , by Adolph Hitler

            8. Various works of Ayn
Rand

            What makes a book silly? Some readers selected books that
state the obvious: Bill Gates' The Road Ahead ("Computers will be
important in the future--gosh!" writes Tim Evans). Gore's Earth in the
Balance was accused of both fuzzy thinking and naked political promotion.
Others nominated titles whose silliness was revealed by time, public debunking,
or both. The easy winner--and easy target--in this category is Ehrlich's 1976
The Population Bomb , a neo-Malthusian tract, which predicted a
population explosion that would cause global shortages, raise prices, poison
the environment, and lower life expectancy. Ehrlich's theories lost steam after
he lost a famous 1980 bet with economist Julian Simon, who wagered that any
basket of resources Ehrlich might name would be cheaper at any date in the
future. Nonetheless, Ehrlich's book was treated to a 21 st
anniversary reprinting in 1997.

            Our more aggressive respondents, excited to nail
entire bodies of work in one go, bypassed books and went straight for the
authors themselves. Ayn Rand garnered the most votes for any single author. A
sampling of other targets:

            
               Kathryn Harrison ("I can think of
no other writer I'd rather unilaterally disarm," fumes Adam Mazmanian);

            
               Gore Vidal ("the consummate
pseudo-intellectual who disguises his bilious prejudices as profound insight,"
writes David Greenberg);

            and the entire Michel
Foucault canon ("or should I say oeuvre ?" asks Ken Baker).

            Others took a more literal approach to silliness. "I
suppose Alice in Wonderland is not exactly what you meant," writes
Andrew Solovay. Maybe not, but you illustrate beautifully our point about
interpreting standards.

            Second, what did we mean by seriousness? Some
readers measured it by amount of attention devoted by the chattering classes on
the pages of prestigious periodicals. Reich's The Greening of America --a
celebration of the hippie ethos--debuted around the same time as the New
York Times op-ed page and dominated that forum for weeks. Other answers
interpreted seriousness--well, more seriously, mentioning Das Kapital ,
Mein Kampf , and Mao's Little Red Book for their enormous impacts
relative to their shaky intellectual foundations. Reader Jeff Staiman argues,
"People devoted their lives to [ Das Kapital ], set up national economies
and whole countries based on it. Of course, only a minority believed in it
deeply, but many of them were serious people." He adds, "if any group is more
shrilly serious than the few hard-core socialists I met at Berkeley, I hope
never to meet them."

            Like NYU's list, 
                  Slate
               'slist has only
two discernible effects: It validates already popular opinions (Did you already
think Reich's book deserved a comeuppance? Well, others did too.), and it makes
the authors feel very bad (or in the NYU list's case, very good) about their
work.

            Actually, our list does
provide one more, far more practical, service: It should serve as grave warning
to anyone who is even remotely contemplating writing a book on the fate of the
environment.

            

               --Jodi Kantor
            

            
               More Fellas for
Hillary
            

            Seven days ago,
Chatterbox asked readers who Hillary Clinton should date if she and the
president ever split (""). Chatterbox suggested, among others, Leon Wieseltier
and Robert Torricelli, but his e-mail inbox overflowed with reader picks.
Herewith, a sampler (and please don't send any more!):

            
               Ralph Nader
            

            
               Hugh Grant
            

            
               Thomas Geoghegan (winsome lefty
labor lawyer and author of The Secret Lives of Citizens (click

here to buy the book)

            
               Al D'Amato
            

            
               Jerry Brown
            

            
               Former President Suharto of
Indonesia
            

            
               Antonio Banderas
            

            
               Mohammed al-Fayed
            

            
               Maurice
Templesman
            

            

               --Timothy Noah
            

         
      
   
