
   
   
      
         
            Wipe Out

            Let other journalists
travel the world in search of scoops. My story is in the kitchen and the living
room--and in the toilet. In researching this piece, I turned my apartment into
a paper torture facility as I compared the wiping power of 10 brands of paper
towels, six lines of facial tissues, and 11 types of toilet paper. Not all my
experiments were successful, and as I mop up the spills I can only hope that my
landlady doesn't read 
                  Slate
               .

            Thanks to late-stage capitalism, the supermarket
shelves sag with scores of brands in the three main paper categories. This is
not as daunting as it sounds, because the market is now dominated by four
companies: giant Procter & Gamble (Bounty, Charmin, and Puffs), and three
other products of merger mania Kimberly-Clark (Scott, Kleenex, and Viva),
Georgia-Pacific (Coronet, Sparkle, Angel Soft, and MD), and Fort James (Brawny,
Quilted Northern, and Green Forest). In picking the 37 contestants for this
survey I strove to find representatives of the three price points--premium,
middle-of-the-road, and generic--and to give recycled and novelty products an
equal opportunity to impress.

            All paper--facial
tissues, writing paper, newsprint--is created equal. What makes "sanitary
wiping paper" (to use the wonderful cadences of marketing-speak) stretchy and
absorbent is a process called "creping": A metal blade removes the paper as it
dries from the steel cylinder on which it was formed, lowering the paper's
density. The premium wiping papers are also embossed, which creates pockets to
hold more "moisture." (Kimberly-Clark's Web site boasts that "On the East Coast only, Kleenex Cottonelle has
been given a unique, patented, gentle texture that is designed to give
consumers a clean, fresh feeling." Apparently, we hardy westerners don't
deserve such luxury.)

            
P aper towels contain more
fibrous pulp. This increases their strength, and the manufacturers usually give
them more pronounced embossing for greater soaking power. Whereas little girls
and babies appear on toilet paper wrappers, paper towel packages depict beefy,
brawny guys, indicating their toughness. In this category the contestants
were:

            
               Premium
            

            Bounty Rinse & Reuse

            Versatile Viva

            Kleenex Viva Job
Squad

            
               Middle-of-the-Road
            

            Scott Towels

            Brawny Pick-a-Size Big Roll

            Kleenex Viva

            
               Recycled
            

            Seventh Generation

            Second Nature Plus

            Envision Preference

            Natural Value

            To see if the towels really could provide the
implied strength and security, I tested the ability of a single sheet to hold
the moisture produced when a damp tea bag was left on it for two minutes.
Unfortunately for me and my security deposit, none of my towels succeeded. I
didn't have any of the blue liquid ad agencies use in commercials to indicate
absorbency, so I gauged the soaking power of individual sheets with tap water.
Absorbency varied little as I poured a quarter-cup of water onto towel after
towel. Not a single one could hold all the fluid, but even the cheapest towel
stayed solid as it was wrung out and used to wipe up the excess from the
counter.

            These tests convinced me
that while paper towels can't perform miracles, even the lowliest
example of the species can soak up liquid and dry your hands. If you're
faced with a big, messy job, it might be worth spending the extra money for a
premium product such as Bounty Rinse & Reuse or Kleenex Viva Job Squad but,
under normal circumstances, a budget recycled product such as the ones on offer
from Natural Value or Second Nature offer good value and provide the desired
durability.

            
I drew the line at catching a cold for this
story and instead subjected six brands of facial tissues to a "spray
test." The contestants were:

            
               Premium
            

            Purely Cotton

            Kleenex ColdCare With Aloe and Vitamin D

            Puffs

            
               Middle-of-the-Road
            

            Heritage Hearth (my
local store brand)

            
               Recycled
            

            Seventh Generation 2-Ply Facial Tissue

            Envision Preference
Ultra

            Using a squirt bottle, I simulated a big, soggy
sneeze to test their absorbency. To my amazement, all the subjects survived the
soaking. While absorbency did not vary, the softness factor is significant--the
downright decadence of the Kleenex ColdCare range makes everything else seem
almost abrasive. (And ply--the number of layers of paper in the product--isn't
everything, the Envision Preference Ultra is a 3-ply "premium" product, but it
still feels like a scouring pad after touching a virgin fiber tissue.) Thicker
tissues also keep germs off your hands, which is nothing to sneeze at.

            You'll come to no harm
if you use tissues as lavatory paper, but your plumbing might--while the
strengthening cellulose fibers they contain are biodegradable, facial tissues
don't break down as quickly as toilet tissue, so flushing is not recommended.
If you're cold-free, you almost certainly don't need the mattressy softness of
an ultra brand (and you can't clean your spectacles with the aloed
hankies).

            
Americans are sheet scared of running out of
toilet tissue --the average family stash of eight rolls doesn't even take
Y2K hoarding into account. Scanning the supermarket shelves, there's a vast
price difference between the budget brands and the premium products, but are
the latter worth the extra? The contestants were:

            
               Premium
            

            Ultra Soft Quilted Northern

            Kleenex Cottonelle
Ultrasoft

            
               Middle-of-the-Road
            

            Heritage Hearth Ultra Soft

            Kleenex Cottonelle

            Charmin

            MD Twin Quilted

            
               Recycled
            

            Seventh Generation

            Natural Value

            
               Novelty Papers
            

            Purely Cotton

            Cottonelle Moist Wipes

            Blue Label

            I didn't conduct any
fiendish experiments on loo paper--I figured that the product's purpose is
specific enough that a trial "in the field" would tell me all I needed to know.
All contestants went through the rotation in my bathroom. For novelty value, I
also tried Cottonelle Moist Wipes, which offer "a fresher clean than with
bathroom tissue alone." The packaging promised that that I'd "feel cleaner,
more refreshed, and confident," but somehow using the adult equivalent of baby
wipes failed to enhance my self-esteem. In the interests of internationalism, I
imported a package of "smooth" Blue Label toilet paper--the medicated, waxy
retro-wipe so beloved of government offices--from Britain. It's a harsh wipe
and seems completely unsuited for contact with one's soft bits, but drape a
sheet of it over a comb and it makes a wonderful kazoolike musical
instrument.

            The latest marketing angle in toilet tissue is the double
or triple roll. There doesn't appear to be any agreement on what constitutes a
standard roll--so-called double rolls measure anywhere from 187 square feet to
280 square feet, and the Charmin triple roll is a giant 462 square feet (though
we're assured it "fits almost all standard dispensers"). The implied economies
don't pan out--in my local supermarket the perfectly adequate single-roll store
brand (Heritage Hearth) was considerably cheaper per square foot than any of
the double or triple rolls (only half the price of the most expensive premium
brand I tried, Kleenex Cottonelle Ultrasoft Double Roll), and it doesn't take
up as much room in my Y2K storeroom.

            Recycled toilet tissues
have improved since the sandpaperlike sheets of the early '80s, but they just
can't compete on the softness front. The recycled ingredients include rough
stuff like cardboard boxes as well as office paper. Still, the case for
recycling is persuasive. The packaging for Seventh Generation toilet paper
claims that "[i]f every household in the U.S. replaced just one roll of 500
sheet virgin fiber bathroom tissues with 100% recycled ones, we could save:
297,000 trees; 1.2 million cubic feet of landfill space, equal to 1,400 full
garbage trucks; 122 million gallons of water, a year's supply for 3,500
families of four." Since most Americans get through 48 to 55 rolls of TP per
year, that's a lot of trees, trash, and water.

            The mainstream brands base their sales pitches on
descriptors such as "gentle," "plush," and "cottony softness," but although
names such as Cottonelle trade on the image of cotton, the products are
wood-based, whereas one relative newcomer to the market is actually made from
the fluffy plant. Purely Cotton bathroom and facial tissues are made from
"cotton linter"--what's left over when fibers and cottonseed oil have been
harvested. As a byproduct, cotton linter is considered 100 percent
recycled/recovered and, although it is bleached to make it snowy white, the
process doesn't produce dioxins as with wood pulp bleaching.

            After my experiments, I'll probably stick with
Purely Cotton, which costs no more than the premium brands, is environmentally
sound, acceptably soft, and appropriately absorbent. Even the cheapest toilet
paper gets the job done, so if you want to impress guests or if you don't want
to keep paper hankies in the bathroom, buy the expensive stuff, but I'll bet
your delicate bits won't notice the difference.

         
      
   
