
   
   
      
         
            A Formula for Disaster 

            The 
                  Observer
                of London pulled no punches in its assessment of the first 11 days of the Kosovo campaign,
describing them as a "fiasco" in an editorial Sunday. "At this stage Nato
confronts the real possibility that Milosevic may end up with de facto control
of an ethnically cleansed Kosovo while Nato takes responsibility for a million
or more refugees. Nato would have lost before the challenge of a minor
dictator. This cannot be allowed. To lose would be to validate and entrench
Milosevic, dangerously strengthening militant Slav nationalism in both Serbia
and Russia. It would be a betrayal of more than a million people in Kosovo
whose sole crime is their race. The refugee crisis would destabilise Macedonia
and Albania. Nato would be exposed as a sham, and its military threat no more
than posturing. The security of the West and the central prop of the western
alliance would be humiliated," the paper said.

            Attacking NATO's lack of
commitment, the Observer opined that "[s]o far Nato has prosecuted the
war as if its aim was no more than to give Milosevic a salutary smack, with the
Americans in particular rating the risk of one American military life before
the lives of the thousands of civilians whose condition is the explicit reason
for the intervention. ... Nato has to raise its game, with all that implies
both in terms of acting on the ground militarily and of relieving the refugee
crisis." Surmising that British Prime Minister Tony Blair is reluctant to
pressure President Clinton to step up the U.S. commitment, the paper concluded
that "if Blair wants to be a successful war leader, like Churchill and
Thatcher, he must learn to be as ruthless."

            The 
                  Sunday Times
                of London agreed that NATO is "at risk of
being humiliated" and suggested that the only opportunity for success is the
use of ground troops. "The only way to ensure victory is for there to be
massive intervention. ... Nato will have to guarantee Kosovo's independence,
making it in effect a protectorate. The Serbs will undoubtedly challenge this
violation of what they regard as their heartland. It will be a form of peace
and justice, but it will be fragile. The West must accept that it is going to
be there for a very long time." While Spain's 
                  El Mundo
                editorialized that "Europe Must Mobilize To Help the Refugees,"
Dawn Neeson articulated a much less charitable position in Britain's
mass-circulation tabloid Daily Star : "It's hard not to be moved by the
pictures of Kosovan refugees streaming out of the war zone, especially the
terrified kids. But have you spared a thought as to where they'll end up? Make
no mistake, they're headed here. Soon you won't be able to move for
head-scarfed women clutching wide-eyed babies and holding out their hands in
your direction. Of course, the majority have been through a hell we can only
imagine, but does that mean we have to swamp our already over-burdened welfare
state?"

            An op-ed piece in the liberal Israeli daily
Ha'aretz recommended a return to the "Tito model" for the former
Yugoslavia. Columnist Teddy Preuss concluded that a "solution will only be
found if the two sides will agree to implement the one and only model that can
prevent a Balkan holocaust, the model created by Yugoslavia's great president,
which assured 40 years of peace in the whole of the Balkans: autonomous
province status for Kosovo." Nevertheless, even Preuss was pessimistic that
such an outcome would occur since "[c]ommon sense and the ability to see all
sides are qualities as plentiful in the Balkans, unfortunately, as they are in
the Middle East " In an exclusive interview with Canada's 
                  Globe and
Mail
               , Chinese Prime Minister Zhu Rongji, who is due to arrive in
the United States Tuesday, said, in regard to the Kosovo conflict, that while
China respects human rights, "we do not think that we can possibly disregard
the sovereignty of a country in the world. And if military interventionism is
to be allowed in all the internal matters like a question of human rights of
any country, that will open a very bad precedent in the world." Zhu stressed
that China expects the same theory of nonintervention to apply to the situation
in Taiwan, which Beijing views as a breakaway province that must ultimately be
returned to Beijing's control.

            
Canada welcomed a new territory April 1 as
Nunavut was carved from the eastern part of the Northwest Territories. In an
editorial Saturday, the Globe and Mail said,
"At a time when the international scene offers us too many horrific images of
the intolerance and bullying that can govern relations between regions and
ethnic groups, Canada is proving once again that intelligence and innovation,
when applied with good will, can almost always permit the accommodation of
difference." The population of the new territory is 85 percent Inuit, and in
the view of the Globe and Mail , "This alone marks an important step
forward in relations between native and non-native in this country,
guaranteeing, for instance, that when federal, provincial and territorial
leaders meet, there will always be someone speaking for an aboriginal majority
somewhere in the country." Writing in the conservative 
                  National Post
                of
Cananda, David Frum was less optimistic. He theorized that the territory's reliance on federal money from
Ottawa will lead to misgovernment. "Nunavut will be misgoverned not because the
people in charge are Inuit, but because the territory has adopted the same
system of governance as Boss Tweed's New York [or] Marion Barry's Washington,
D.C. ... Revenue from outside sources minus an effective opposition plus a
co-opted population is a formula for disaster, regardless of whether the
government is controlled by Inuit, whites, or South Sea Islanders."

             

             

         
      
   
