
   
   
      
         
             The Phony War

            This is a season of refusal in American politics.
The Clinton scandals, exhausted, refuse to revive themselves. Texas Gov. George
W. Bush, anointed, refuses to campaign for president till summer arrives.
Congress, terrified of Social Security, refuses to do anything at all.

            Politics, too, abhors a
vacuum, so Washington has concocted a story to fill the void: Bill Bradley,
whose presidential campaign was written off just months ago, is surging, and
Vice President Al Gore, the nominee presumptive, is in deep trouble. No matter
that the New Hampshire primary is 10 months away. In recent weeks, the New
York Times , the Wall Street Journal , the Chicago Tribune ,
many smaller papers, and all three newsweeklies have touted the viability of
Bradley's campaign and the messiness of Gore's. Last Sunday, the great sage
David Broder declared that Gore was struggling and conferred the mantle of
electability on Bradley. Bradley's numbers seem to be rising in the polls: One
shows Bradley favored by 35 percent of Democratic voters, trailing Gore by only
17 points. (Other polls show Bradley in the 20s, trailing Gore by at least 25
points.)

            Bradley is an impressive candidate, blessed with celebrity,
thoughtfulness, and a good heart, and Gore can be an erratic campaigner. But
the Bradley Surge and Gore Stumble have little to do with the candidates. We
are witnessing one of the first fake battles of what the Progressive Policy
Institute's Will Marshall calls "the phony war" of the campaign. This is the
period when voters are indifferent, and when journalists, Democratic
candidates, and Republican troublemakers spin and position and jockey to write
the script for the coming real campaign--in this case, a script that makes
Bradley a white knight and Gore a looming disaster.

            The first reason for the
Bradley Surge is that Dollar Bill is proving himself a better fund-raiser than
anyone expected. He collected $4.3 million in the first three months of the
year, less than half what Gore raised, but more than enough to make him a
legitimate candidate. His first fund-raising reports two weeks ago gave
journalists an opening to laud him.

            The Bradley surge also owes something to his fame.
Bradley is the John McCain of the left, the politician who turns baby boomer
men weak in the knees. His "Princeton, basketball, sense-of-where-you-are,
Rhodes Scholar, New York Knick" mystique won him a free pass as the thinking
man's senator. This was only reinforced by his celebrated reluctance to run for
president in 1988 and 1992 and his "politics is broken" retirement speech in
1996. His reputation as the politician too good for politics has been a key
feature of the early adulatory campaign coverage.

            But the most important
reasons for Bradley's supposed surge are independent of the candidate. Bradley
has lucked into a one-on-one race. Besides serving as yet another useful
basketball metaphor for Bradley--"I'm going one-on-one with Al Gore"--the
two-man race gives Bradley instant viability. He's automatically one gaffe away
from the nomination. Political Washington is desperate for a Democratic horse
race, but a horse race can only happen if Bradley is perceived to be strong,
and he will only be perceived to be strong if everyone says he is.

            The one-on-one campaign also explains Bradley's apparent
rise in the polls. As the only challenger, Bradley collects all the anti-Gore
votes. Bradley's numbers have climbed as pollsters dropped Richard Gephardt,
Paul Wellstone, and Jesse Jackson from their surveys. "Fifty-two to 35 looks a
lot better for Bradley than 52 to 13 to 12 to 10," gripes a Gore staffer.

            Bradley's media boomlet
also depends on Democratic anxiety about Gore. Gore trails both George W. Bush
and Elizabeth Dole in nationwide polls. More than 50 percent of one poll sample
called Gore "boring." Gore has become a kind of voodoo doll for Clinton: When
the president is in trouble, his approval ratings remain high, but Gore's
numbers sag. A recent Pew Research Center survey found that the vast majority
of Americans are sick of the Clinton administration scandals, and they are
taking out their frustration on Gore. "Americans want someone who continues
Clinton's policies and programs but who is not Clinton. Gore ought to fit that
bill," says Pew Director Andrew Kohut. "But somehow there is a link between
Clinton and Gore that is hurting Gore." Democrats feeling panicky over the Gore
numbers are touting Bradley as the remedy: Every piece on Bradley emphasizes
that he shares Gore's moderate, thoughtful, New Democrat politics but isn't
handcuffed to Clinton.

            Republicans are doing their best to intensify this
Democratic anxiety about the vice president. They are trying to Quaylize Gore.
Republican house members, Republican senators, the Republican National
Committee, and Republican interest groups have been assaulting Gore for the
past few months, trying to turn him into a figure of fun. They have ridiculed
his "creating the Internet" comment, his claim that he and Tipper were the
model for Love Story , and his anecdotes about growing up as a farm
boy.

            The notion that Bradley
is rising and Gore is falling can become true if everyone keeps declaring it
so. But what's more likely is that time and the natural course of campaigns
will take their toll. Campaigns are self-correcting: If Bradley gets close
enough to be a real challenge to Gore, he will be subject to the same withering
fire that Gore faces. It will be pointed out again and again that Bradley is
just as awkward a campaigner as Gore. Bradley, who has belittled Gore's
microproposals (sprawl, traffic, etc.), will see his own self-proclaimed ""
questioned. As the plucky challenger, Bradley can campaign both to the left and
right of Gore, picking up support from anti-Gore, pro-labor activists on one
day and boosting his pro-business, pro-free-trade agenda to Wall Streeters a
few days later. But if his campaign really prospers and he has to explain what
he believes, he'll have a hard time holding that coalition together. At the
moment, Bradley can promote his support for campaign finance reform, but if he
does well, he'll be battered with questions about his own aggressive fund
raising.

            The progression of the campaign will also rescue Gore from
his Vice Presidential Malaise. The Democratic fretfulness about Gore's polls is
premature: Vice presidents always poll terribly in the year before their
presidential campaign. George Bush, you may remember, trailed Gary Hart in 1987
polls, and Newsweek even ran a cover story about Bush and "the wimp
factor." Gore has been Clinton's lackey for more than six years. He's loyal to
his president, and that loyalty makes him look ineffectual. (George W. Bush
kills Gore in poll questions about "leadership." Bush is the manly governor of
Texas, while Gore moderates Reinventing Government seminars.)

            The cure for the phony war will be the real one.
Come fall and winter, surges and stumbles will really mean something. By then
Gore will be campaigning seriously, distancing himself from Clinton, and
running macho ads; Bradley will have defined his big ideas and endured the
inevitable media backlash to his current rave notices; and the voters will
actually be paying attention.

         
      
   
