
   
   
      
         
             China Crackup

            For the past two weeks,
Republicans have raised a ruckus over President Clinton's failure to promptly
remove a suspected Chinese spy from the Los Alamos nuclear lab. Making the
GOP's case on Face the Nation , Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., blamed the spy
fiasco on "six years of inattention and a feckless photo-op foreign policy."
But when asked how he would treat China, McCain sketched a policy hardly
distinguishable from Clinton's. And when asked about Russia's loose nukes, he
conceded, "I don't know the answer to this. Maybe it's inappropriate for me to
come on this program."

            It's painful to watch
Republicans discuss foreign affairs these days. No doctrine binds together
their complaints about Clinton's actions. While calling him soft on China, many
quietly espouse the same Clinton-Bush policy of trade-plus-scolding. While
demanding boldness abroad, they have opposed military action in Kosovo, Iraq,
Sudan, and Afghanistan. And while falling back on Cold War rhetoric, they
ignore Russia's nuclear garage sale. Winning a presidential election on foreign
policy will be hard enough. Winning it without a coherent message will be
impossible. The Republican identity crisis is fourfold.

            1. The Cold War
               . Many Republicans
see the spy scandal as an opportunity to revive Cold War rhetoric. They allude
constantly to "Los Alamos" and "the Rosenbergs." On Meet the Press , Pat
Buchanan accused Clinton of failing to "clean out a nest of spies in America's
atomic laboratories who've stolen the most vital secrets since the Rosenbergs
went to the electric chair." At a Senate hearing Tuesday, another presidential
hopeful, Sen. Bob Smith, R-N.H., compared the Chinese spy case to past Soviet
espionage and warned that it might precipitate another "arms race."

            Other Republicans, however, realize that nuclear
threats are now diffuse rather than concentrated in one enemy. Appearing on the
same show with Buchanan, Sen. Richard Lugar, R-Ind., rejected the Cold War
model: "I accept the fact that [the Chinese] spy on us. Many people do." At
Tuesday's hearing, Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman John Warner, R-Va.,
tried to broaden the discussion from China, which has 24 missiles that can
reach the United States, to Russia, whose 7,000 such weapons could end up on
the black market.

            The missile-defense
debate highlights the Republican dilemma. The original Strategic Defense
Initiative was supposed to defend the United States against a massive nuclear
strike by the Soviet Union. By contrast, the missile-defense program approved
by the Senate Wednesday is designed to stop one or two missiles fired by a
rogue nation such as North Korea or Iran. If Buchanan and Lugar can't agree on
which kind of threat China poses, they won't be able to agree which kind of
anti-missile system the GOP should stand for.

            2. Capitalism. The GOP has been the party of free
trade. President Bush made this the linchpin of U.S. China policy. Over the
past two years, the Republican Congress has renewed most-favored-nation trade
status for China, approved legislation enabling U.S. companies to sell China
nonmilitary nuclear technology, and killed a proposed ban on satellite sales to
the Chinese. More than 100 House Republicans signed up last month to sponsor
legislation to relax restrictions on exports of encryption technology, despite
Clinton's objections that this technology might be passed to terrorists. This
week, the Republican-leaning business community launched a lobbying blitz to
remind "hawks" in Congress that China "will be the second-largest computer
market in the world by the year 2000."

            Yet the GOP's best-known
hawk, Sen. Jesse Helms, R-N.C., is leading the charge to restrict trade with
China as punishment for its spying. "The continuing problems with Chinese human
rights violations, espionage, and possible technology transfers suggest that
this is not the appropriate time for China to enter" the World Trade
Organization, he says. Like-minded strategist Bill Kristol denounces
Republicans who have sided with Clinton's policy of "trade above all else in
China."

            3. Constructive engagement. Having ripped Bush's
engagement policy in 1992, Buchanan is already locking and loading the same
critique for 2000. "The policy of engagement has devolved and degenerated into
a policy of appeasement," he declared this week. Many conservatives say
engagement has led to nuclear proliferation, deterioration in human rights, and
now laxity against espionage.

            Former House Speaker Newt Gingrich avidly defended
engagement, however, and his successor, Rep. Dennis Hastert, R-Ill., agrees.
"The more we're involved with China, the better off we are--for us and for
China and the Pacific area," Hastert said last week. "It's also important that
we stress our views on human rights. If we aren't engaged, we can't do that."
Likewise, Sen. Craig Thomas, R-Wyo., rejected his colleagues' fierce response
to the spy story: "I've never supported the idea that every time China does
something we don't like we ought to submit a thing to the Senate and get after
them."

            The GOP's identity crisis
over engagement is almost comic. When Sam Donaldson pointed out on This
Week that two Republicans, President Richard Nixon and Secretary of State
Henry Kissinger, had pioneered engagement in the Shanghai Communiqué, George
Will exploded: "I was for impeaching Nixon over the Shanghai
Communiqué!" Clinton's spokesmen have learned to brush off Republican critics
of engagement by quoting the policy's Republican defenders.

            4. Clinton. Republicans aren't sure whether to blame
the spy case on ideology or corruption. Some want to paint Democrats as soft on
defense. Sen. Tim Hutchinson, R-Ark., calls the case "symptomatic of the casual
attitude with which the Clinton administration views issues of national
security." Others want to blame it on Chinese contributions to the Democrats.
McCain, for example, demands an investigation of "the allegations about
technology transfer [and] all these campaign contributions that came out of
China."

            Nor have conservatives figured out whether to blame
Democrats in general or Clinton in particular. Many have grown more disgusted
with Clinton's triangulations than with congressional Democrats'
straightforward liberalism. "The Clinton China policy from the first has been
subsumed into the permanent campaign," says the Wall Street Journal ,
citing objections to that policy "from Democrats and Republicans alike."
Moreover, given the political damage the GOP has suffered by unilaterally
impeaching Clinton, Republican leaders fear that the merits of their arguments
will once again be drowned by charges of partisanship. Sure enough, this week
Clinton spokesman Joe Lockhart accused the GOP of using the spy case for
"partisan point-scoring."

            To beat the partisanship rap, several Republican
leaders are invoking Democrats as their allies against Clinton. House Majority
Leader Dick Armey, R-Texas, cites "a growing unrest" over China "on both sides
of the aisle," and House Majority Whip Tom DeLay, R-Texas, accuses Clinton of
trying to "cover up" Congress' "bipartisan" findings of laxity in Clinton's
China policy. When ABC's George Will tried to goad Rep. Chris Cox, R-Calif.,
into blaming Democrats for suppressing those findings, Cox shot him down: "It
is not a Democratic party position, because Democrats and Republicans have
worked very closely together on this issue."

            If Clinton's approach to
world affairs has been aimless and inconsistent, assailing his China policy
from all directions is hardly the way to make that point. The opposite of
inconsistency is principle. And the GOP has yet to figure out what its
principle is.

         
      
   
