
   
   
      
         
            Let's Blame Bill

            The
frustration of the bellicose British press at the half-hearted pursuit of the
war in Kosovo vented itself Wednesday in an editorial in the Times attacking
President Clinton, who, it said, has "proved his absolute inadequacy as a
Commander-in-Chief, stumbling on a stage that is bigger than his talents can
match and performing with hesitancy, frailty and fear." It added, "[T]his war
will not be serious until Mr Clinton listens to the Pentagon, rather than the
latest opinion poll. He has never countenanced a campaign plan; and in the
absence of one, even air power has been misapplied. ... Mr Clinton has
retreated into the semantic ambiguities for which his presidency has become
infamous." The editorial concluded that "[f]or Nato, for European peace and for
Britain, the true, high reckoning begins: it is called failure."

            The
Daily Telegraph led its front page Wednesday with a report that
both Clinton and British Prime Minister Tony Blair were struggling "to hold
back a growing tide of criticism of their leadership of the Kosovo conflict."
Along with other papers, the Telegraph reported cracks in British
bipartisan support for the NATO offensive. In an article in the
Telegraph , the Conservative Party spokesman on foreign affairs, Michael
Howard, called for the establishment of a committee of inquiry into the war and
the "diplomatic failures" that preceded it. Howard described the bombing of the
Chinese Embassy in Belgrade as "an act of gross incompetence." He said, "To use
outdated street maps for an operation of this kind beggars belief."

            The
liberal Guardian led Wednesday on "gloom" in NATO as China and Russia
hardened their demands for a halt to airstrikes before they will agree to
support peace moves in the United Nations. Having consistently urged the use of
ground forces, the paper finally recognized in an editorial that "the
possibility of a ground attack has dwindled." It said that the British and the
French have been willing to do their bit but that Clinton "could not muster the
will, or lacks the necessary political weight, to commit the United States to
ground action." The central issue now, it said, is that "NATO forces, acting
for the Kosovo Albanians, must have preponderant physical power on the ground,
whatever the formalities of status may be." The liberal Independent 's
front-page lead spoke of "an unmistakable whiff of panic and confusion in the
West's councils of war."

            There
was gloom on the continent as well. Le Monde of Paris led its front page Wednesday with the
headline "Kosovo emptied of half its population" and said in an editorial that
President Slobodan Milosevic knows--"because we have been at pains to tell
him"--that he need not fear a land offensive, and he knows the limits of the
air bombardments. "He can, at his leisure, test the unity and determination of
the allies," it added. "One way or another, it is always he who holds the
cards." On Tuesday, the Greek daily Ta Nea published a leaked NATO
document warning that Albania, Montenegro, and Macedonia are in imminent danger
of economic and political collapse because of the Kosovo crisis. The
displacement of nearly 600,000 Kosovar refugees threatens to destabilize the
entire region, it said. The "restricted" memo, dated April 29, was reported to
have been sent by NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana to the alliance's 19
member states last week.

            With
only five days to go before voting in the Israeli general election, the
government of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu is reported to be reconciled to
defeat. The main headline Wednesday in the daily Maariv quoted Netanyahu
as saying, "I'll apparently lose." One senior Likud Party official told
Yediot Aharanot , "We don't have many good reasons to be optimistic."
Meanwhile, two more public opinion polls showed that Labor Party and One Israel
leader Ehud Barak is moving inexorably ahead. The Jerusalem Post led Wednesday
on Netanyahu deciding, because of the polls, to take personal charge of Likud's
TV advertising campaign.

            

               Ha'aretz
led
on Defense Minister Moshe Arens accepting the possibility of a Palestinian
state. He reportedly said that recent developments have made territorial
compromise inevitable. The Jerusalem correspondent of the Independent of
London described the hatred among different religious and ethnic
communities that has surfaced during the Israeli election campaign. In one TV
debate, Yusef Lapid, a Holocaust survivor and founder of the Shinui Party which
seeks to reduce the influence of ultra-Orthodox Jews, challenged Eli Suissa,
the ultra-Orthodox interior minister, with the words: "Maybe you'd like to put
me in a concentration camp?" To this Suissa replied, "You've already been in a
concentration camp and you didn't learn your lesson."

            The
firing of Russian Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov by Boris Yeltsin two days
before impeachment proceedings against the president were due to begin in the
Duma provoked little surprise in that country's newspapers Wednesday.
Kommersant said Primakov has been under threat of dismissal for at least
two months, and that Sergei Stephasin, Yeltsin's choice to succeed him as
acting prime minister, has already been offered the job at least three times.
Segodnya said it is understandable that Yeltsin ran out of sympathy for
a man whose main political support came from Communists, who "have proclaimed
as their basic goal the overthrow of the president." Nezavisimaya Gazeta
said Primakov is going without loss of face because he is already recognized as
the man who saved Russia from an abyss. His chances of winning the next
presidential election, if he decides to run, are "very high," the paper
said.

            In an
editorial Wednesday on the booming U.S. economy, the Financial Times warned that the
country is running out of workers. With unemployment at a 30-year low, there
aren't many motivated people left for the labor market to absorb, it said. "As
Alan Greenspan pointed out last week, faster adoption of new technology has
helped productivity growth to increase. But this may well prove temporary. When
the economy runs out of workers, the laws of supply and demand take over."

            
               Le
Monde ran a front-page article about unexpected difficulties facing the
new single European currency, the euro. It said the European Central Bank has a
major problem creating a consistent monetary policy because of growing economic
disparities among the countries of "Euroland." It said, "While some Euroland
countries are enjoying American-style growth, others are on the brink of
recession."

            
               La Repubblica of Rome
reported Wednesday that the singer Michael Jackson has been fined 4 million
lire (around $2,200) for plagiarism. He was found to have copied 37 notes from
a song by Italian pop star Albano Carrisi in his song, "Will You Be There?" The
judge agreed there were extenuating circumstances because both songwriters had
been inspired by old blues music.

         
      
   
