
   
   
      
         
            Learn Politics While You Drive

            If you want to be a Republican candidate--and who
doesn't, really?--you need "a core set of principles," "a core set of beliefs,"
"a core vision," and "fire in the belly." You must "be true to yourself," "show
that you care," and treat every voter like "a precious soul." And don't forget
to involve yourself with a high-profile cause before you announce your
candidacy--it'll really help your fund raising.

            I know all this because I have spent the past week
listening to Prepare To Win , a program of audiotapes and accompanying
"workbooks" (I'm not kidding) from the Republican National Committee--four
hours, 28 speakers (senators, House members, etc.), and advice on everything
from fund raising to hiring staff to wooing the media. The RNC is distributing
Prepare To Win to hundreds of potential 2000 candidates for Congress,
state legislatures, county commissioner, and other offices. Would-be candidates
are supposed to listen while they sleep, eat, or drive. (Here's RNC Chairman
Jim Nicholson urging Republicans to listen "over and over again" to the tapes.
[.]) It was inevitable that self-improvement culture, which has infected every
other aspect of American life, would eventually contaminate politics. At last
it has.

            Washington, where
members of Congress are all well-coiffed, well-spoken, well-dressed, and
well-prepped, makes it easy to forget that politicians are made, not born. For
every Bill Clinton who springs from his mother's womb wearing a blue suit and
speaking in sound bites, there are scores of awkward, ambitious Rotarians
needing guidance. In days of yore, aspiring pols learned their trade by sitting
in the party clubhouse. But political education has become alarmingly
sophisticated since the late '80s, when Newt Gingrich's GOPAC began mailing
tens of thousands of strategy tapes to Republican activists. Both parties now
offer seminars training candidates how to run. But Prepare To Win marks
the first time either party has tried to educate prospective
candidates.

            Unlike GOPAC's tapes, which mix strategy with red-meat
ideology, Prepare To Win is pure process. It mostly ignores Republican
positions and concentrates on campaign mechanics. Speakers urge you to pay
attention to filing deadlines, hire a lawyer, form a kitchen Cabinet of friends
who can rein you in if the campaign unhinges you, court community leaders and
seek their endorsement before you announce, choreograph your
announcement to maximize media coverage, etc. It's all sensible
enough--especially the presentation of Sen. Susan Collins of Maine--but it's
thunderingly obvious. After a couple of hours, I began to ask myself: How dumb
does the Republican Party think I am? Listen, for example, to New Mexico party
Chairman John Dendahl's leaden account of how to use humor in your campaign.
(.)

            The workbooks exacerbate
this condescending simple-mindedness. The 10 written questions that accompany
each speech are of the sort I haven't seen since sixth-grade reading
comprehension: "How [according to Rep. Jennifer Dunn of Washington] do you
become an Initiator, Innovator, and Leader?" "What did [Rep. Ileana
Ros-Lehtinen of Florida] learn as a girl scout leader?" Answer: Be
prepared.

            At heart, however, Prepare To Win is neither
commonsensical nor condescending. It is deeply--so deeply that the speakers
aren't even aware of it--cynical. The superficial premise is that politics is
about harnessing your beliefs, your honesty, and your caring heart for the
common good. The political veterans dispensing advice genuinely seem to be
preaching idealism. Speaker after speaker insists that your campaign
must be founded on your "core principles" (beliefs, vision, whatever. My
favorite workbook question is: "What are your core principles?" If you have to
ask ...). The tapes overflow with Polonius platitudes: "Be true to yourself";
"People don't care what you know till they know that you care." Sen. Sam
Brownback of Kansas repeatedly insists that you see people as "precious souls,"
not as voters or contributors.

            But it's odd to be
celebrating "precious souls" on a tape series designed to teach candidates
exactly how to wring money from contributors and seduce skeptical
voters . While saying that candidates should be true to themselves, the
speakers spend the bulk of their time detailing how campaigns are artifice and
how candidates must learn to manipulate voters, contributors, images, and
reporters.

            This fundamental cynicism reveals itself in countless small
ways. Here, for example, Georgia party Chairman Rusty Paul instructs how to
make a candidacy announcement "political theater" with the candidate as the
"main actor." (.)

            The otherwise admirable
Sen. Collins counsels listeners to embrace a cause before they become
candidates, but not because the cause itself matters: The cause is a great way
to build a contributor base. Listen to Rep. Dunn as she gives cheerful,
happy-talk advice about how to use anecdotes to show voters that you care about
people and not just policy. Women, she notes, "are much more responsive to a
strong positive message than they are to attacks." Then, in her final sentence,
Dunn offers her real advice: "Leave those attacks for the advertising
campaign." (.)

            
Overwhelmingly, I had the sense that my
Prepare To Win instructors had no idea how cynical they sound. Nowhere
is this more apparent than in the presentation of Sen. Kit Bond, a folksy
Missourian. In this clip (), Bond details his fund-raising philosophy. He
proudly describes how, during his first congressional campaign, he refused a
large contribution from someone who wanted him to change his position on an
issue:

            
               At that moment I made the decision that I
am running this campaign. I am not going to be told by any contributor that I
should take a stand they want me to solely because they would give me money for
it. I told 'em, "no thanks." If they want to support me in the objectives I
have outlined, that's fine, but I don't take positions or make votes in
response to offers of contributions.
            

            Bond says this as though recounting some remarkable
achievement. In fact, what his grand principle amounts to is: no vote for cash.
Sen. Bond does not take bribes! Prepare To Win is this passage writ
large. Beneath its pious talk of visions and core beliefs, it is teaching a
lesson about politics that is much shabbier and much more real than the one it
pretends to teach.

         
      
   
