
   
   
      
         
            No. 223: &quot;You Who?&quot;

            

               "I'm on top, I'm 35 years old, I don't want to get hurt anymore, and
I've got nothing left to prove." Who said this about what?
            

            by noon
ET Tuesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's Question
(No. 222)--"Zanimax":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       The
Iranian daily newspaper Zan (Farsi for "woman") and the American movie
company Miramax (English for "Big Mira"?) are in trouble for similar offenses.
What?
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            
"Running afoul of parent company Disney."-- Michael Fein
            

            
"Requesting public information from the city of New York."-- Dave
Gaffen
            

            "I have
no idea what the offense is, but Khomeini is Farsi for 'Weinstein.'
"-- Adrianne Tolsch
            

            
"Forcing women into lesser roles."-- Chrysa Kieke-Sciglitano
            

            
"Trouble at Zan due to clerics. Trouble at Miramax due to guy who made
Clerks ."-- Cliff Schoenberg
            

             

             

             

             

             

             

             

             

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Foreign magazines sound so deliciously trivial, so
delightfully parochial. Zan . It's no Time or Spin or
Maxim . That's my delightfully parochial view, an easy one to maintain
because here in America we're No. 1--except for education, income, and infant
mortality. Do other nations escape this jingoism? Surely neither Belgium nor
Belize nor Brunei can assert this sort of claim. But of course they can; every
nation can, as long it avoids hard data and stakes its pride on cultural
superiority.

            Saturday night in New York, the big "Gypsy Caravan"
concert presented Romany musicians from six different nations. Musafir, an
Indian group, featured a drummer who played unimaginably complex rhythms on a
dholak. The Hungarians, Kalyi Jag, featured a drummer who played the
milk can. Can the Hungarians really believe it's all culturally relative?
Surely the milk can guy wakes up in the middle of the night and admits to
himself that the dholak guy is just better.

            Of course these kinds of
questions always confound me because I'm from a country where Disney owns the
evening news and the only compelling rhythm is the beat of my heart when the
camera zooms in on Peter Jennings. He articulates so clearly when he speaks of
cherry-tree-eating beavers!

            
               Infidel
Answer
            

            
               Zan and Miramax are in hot water for
sassing religion, a serious offense in this, the neo-Middle Ages.

            Miramax embarrassed prissy parent company Disney by
making Dogma , directed by Kevin Smith ( Clerks , Chasing
Amy ). Everyone involved apologized meekly. "Why make trouble?" asked
contrite Miramax boss, Harvey Weinstein. Smith says his movie was "from first
to last always intended as a love letter to both faith and God almighty." The
movie, featuring Ben Affleck, Matt Damon, Alanis Morissette, Selma Hayek, and
Chris Rock, will be distributed by some other company so that really gullible
people will think Disney had nothing to do with it.

            Iranian authorities confiscated copies of Zan
after it printed a cartoon showing a thug being asked to kill a woman rather
than a man because under Islamic law a woman's "blood money" is half that of a
man's. (Blood money is compensation that must be paid to the family of a victim
who is murdered or killed in an accident.) Gholamhossein Rahbarpour, head of
Iran's Revolutionary Courts, told the Associated Press that Zan insulted
Islam because blood money is "one of the main judicial and religious principles
of Islam." The paper is banned from publishing until after the case goes to
court.

            Faraj Balafkan,
Zan 's editor, is expected to continue her fight for press freedom.
Michael Eisner, Disney's chairman, is expected to continue his fight to make as
much money as possible.

            
               Ultradull
Extra
            

            Last week, participants were invited to invent an
organization more soporific than "Business Leaders for Sensible Priorities," a
group that ran a policy ad on the op-ed page of Wednesday's New York
Times . A few particularly tepid examples:

            

               "Indiana Dentists for Civic Responsibility."-- Neil Pollack
               

               "The Charles Osgood Appreciation Society."-- Tim Carvell
               

               "The Ya-Ya Sisterhood of Concerned Scientists."-- Chris Kelly
               

               "Citizens Concerned With Environmental Development. (An actual
organization.)"-- Brian Danenberg
               

               "Corporate Lawyers Against Unnecessary Integrity."-- Francis
Heaney
               

               "Mid-Level Executives at Mid-Cap Companies for Increased Median
Compensation."-- Michael Connelly
               

               "http://www.corporatecomedy.com. (An actual Web
site.)"-- Anonymous
               

            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Eastern antipathy toward Salman Rushdie; Western
antipathy toward Gwyneth Paltrow.

         
      
   
