
   
   
      
         
            No. 228: &quot;Still Not Sure&quot;

            

               At yesterday's ceremony honoring the Teacher of the Year, Bill Clinton
recalled that his sixth-grade teacher once told him, "If you don't learn the
difference, I'm not sure whether you're going to be governor or wind up in the
penitentiary." What difference?
            

             

            by noon
ET Wednesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Monday's Question
(No. 227)-- "Vile":
            

            

               Fox TV is planning to fill hundreds of plastic vials. With what?
Why?
            

            "Oh,
no. This isn't a promotion for The PJs , is it?"-- Tim Carvell
( Dennis Cass , Charles Star , and Doug Strauss had similar
answers.)

            
"Peas--one per vial. The vials were then labeled 'Monday--lunch,'
'Monday--dinner,' 'Tuesday--lunch,' etc., and loaded onto the Ally
McBeal catering cart."-- Dale Shuger (similarly, Tim Carvell ,
Liz Mason , Noah Meyerson , and Norman Oder )

            "With
colored water. Look, Mr. Groening, we agreed to promote Futurama , but we
never specified how, and we think this will work."-- Greg Diamond
(similarly, Steven Davis )

            
"Something they call 'Hume Juice.' "-- M. Pesca
            

            "The
vials are part of a promotional campaign for the May sweeps special When
Soda Goes Flat IV ."-- Doug Strauss
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Daniel's
Wrap-Up
            

            Last month, Fox TV announced the creation of two new
children's cable channels: Boyz and Girlz. Fox President and CEO Rich Cronin
called this separate-but-equal programming an effort to "superserve" children,
adding, "We will not stereotype in any way."

            Which is more than the
News Quiz can promise about Fox. To judge from your answers, the entire outfit
is nothing more than a dumping ground for lurid videos of anorexic lawyers
attacking pretentious investigators of paranormal cartoons, presided over by an
immoral tycoon. Which only proves that sometimes the easiest jokes really are
the most satisfying.

            
               Off the Deep End
Answer
            

            To celebrate the final episode of Melrose
Place , Fox plans to fill hundreds of plastic vials with water from the
MP swimming pool, as Jon Delfin presumably did not know when he
submitted what he thought was a joke (click ). The vials will be used as prizes
in radio station giveaways and other contests, according to TV
Guide .

            Yeah, I know Randy never
takes his ideas from TV Guide . Nor does he often stoop to the crassness
inherent in the combination of "Fox TV" and "plastic vials." The truth is this
question could have been yet more vulgar. I refrained from including TV
Guide 's report that the water was initially stored in "giant jugs."
Godspeed, Heather Locklear.

            
               Gag Reflex
Extra
            

            The bad rap on New
Yorker cartoons is that they are inscrutable. The more depressing truth is
that they are often simply mundane. Try to identify which of the following
captions are from urbane New Yorker cartoons and which are from a
syndicated strip you wouldn't be caught dead reading, The Lockhorns .

            
               Captions
            

            1. "I'd like to read from a prepared statement."

            2. "Look, I've denied it--can we move on?"

            3. "I think you might qualify for federal disaster
relief."

            4. "Maybe we should consolidate our finance
companies."

            5. "What's your exit strategy?"

            6. "Why would I want to watch Crossfire ? I'm
living it!"

            7. "Let's focus on what we do best--eating out."

            8. "Congratulations--you
were the topic on all this week's talk shows."

            
               Answers
            

            1. The Lockhorns . Leroy arrives home drunk.
In the hypothetical New Yorker version, a husband is caught in bed with
another woman.

            2. The New Yorker . A husband is caught in bed
with another woman. May also have appeared in Playboy .

            3. The Lockhorns . Loretta emerges from the
beauty parlor. In the New Yorker version, a precocious child surveys her
friend's demolished sand castle.

            4. The Lockhorns . Loretta pays bills. In the
New Yorker version, precocious children play Monopoly. Could have
appeared in this week's "Money Issue."

            5. The New Yorker . A prisoner addresses his
cellmate. In the Lockhorns version, Leroy addresses a friend as their
wives drag them to the opera.

            6. The Lockhorns . Leroy and Loretta watch
television. In the New Yorker version, a cat and dog watch
television.

            7. The New Yorker . A couple enters a cafe. In
the Lockhorns version, Leroy surveys Loretta's home-cooked meal.

            8. The Lockhorns .
Situation unclear. In the New Yorker version, the situation is also
unclear.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            
               World's Most Videos
Attack .

         
      
   
