
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Ask Not What You
Can Constitutionally Do ...
            

            I'm not sure I quite see what's odd about accepting
a post that, as an abstract legal matter, you think is unconstitutional (see
""). Many people, for instance, believe that all independent agencies (such as
the FCC) are unconstitutional, and that the Supreme Court was mistaken in
upholding this "fourth branch of government." Does it really follow that a
person who believes this can't in good conscience go to work for the FCC?

            I don't think that such punctilio is really morally
or professionally obligatory. The battle over the constitutionality of
independent agencies was fought in the courts; it was won by those who've
argued that such agencies are constitutional. For our legal system's purposes,
that's that, at least until the court reverses its views. A fair-minded person
might say, "Given that the law as interpreted today authorizes such agencies, I
feel that I can do good/do my duty to my country by working for this
agency."

            Same for the independent
counsel. Now, if one thought that the office was not just unconstitutional but
immoral , that would be a different story; for instance, if one thinks
that it violates basic human rights to outlaw drugs, going to work for the DEA
would be a bit iffy. But I don't think people really think this (or should
think this) about the independent counsel statute.

            -- Eugene
Volokh
            

            UCLA Law School

            Los
Angeles

            
               Inflated
Inflation
            

            After referring to the USA Today report that
economists don't expect rising gasoline prices to trigger inflation, ""
concludes with the rhetorical flourish, "Huh--isn't inflation primarily
measured as a rate of increase in cost?"

            Both the economists cited and Scott Shuger seem
confused. Inflation is an overall rise in the price of goods and services. The
key word is overall . The increase or decrease in any particular item not
only does not, but cannot, produce inflation. When the amount of money in
circulation is fixed, if expenditures rise in one area, a fortiori, they fall
in another. Inflation, by definition, occurs when the government increases the
money supply faster than the real growth of the economy, because this increase
is the only way more money can become available to chase the same number of
goods.

            A logical corollary is that inflation cannot be
"triggered" by increasing wages, farm prices, or health care costs. If food and
medical care tripled in cost, people would of necessity spend less on other
things to pay for the increase or cut down on the food and medical care they
purchased.

            Falling demand for other
things would necessarily result in falling prices for those things. Wealth
would indeed be moved around, some people enriched, and others would be
financial losers. But there would not be, nor could there have been, an
overall increase in prices. An overall increase in prices is only
possible when there has been an overall increase in the amount of money in
circulation.

            -- Bennett
Weinberg
            

            
Philadelphia

            
               Groaning
            

            In his "" lamenting Matt Groening's absence from
the Comic Journal 's Top 100 list, A.O. Scott claims that "Groening's
willing, if somewhat ironic, embrace of the marketing bonanza his creation has
unleashed may have cost him his rightful spot in the the Comics
Journal 's highbrow/subculture pantheon."

            Oh, really? Then why is
Charles Schulz, surely the all-time top marketing whore, listed in the No. 2
spot? There must be a better explanation for Groening being left off the list,
and there is: Life in Hell sucks. It hasn't been funny or insightful for
over a decade. True, the same thing can be said for Peanuts , but
Peanuts had a solid 25 years of brilliance before burnout. Groening's
reputation is entirely dependent on two 12-episode series, Work Is Hell
and School Is Hell . The entire decade since then has just been
Akbar-and-Jeff minimalist filler. Scott confirms this, by the way, by only
talking about the quality of The Simpsons in his article--an undisputed
fact, but the Comics Journal wasn't ranking animators.

            -- Kim
Scarborough
            

            Chicago

             

         
      
   
