
   
   
      
         
            No. 234: &quot;I Can't Kuwait&quot;

            

               You give the (brief) lead; I give the headline from the Kuwait
Times : "Tips To Reduce 'Burden' of Students."
            

             

            by 5
p.m. ET Sunday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Wednesday's
Question (No. 233)--"Courtly":
            

            

               
                  
                     "I couldn't do my current job without them," said
Justice Antonin Scalia yesterday as he waved something in the air.
What?
                  
               
            

            "Four
of the world's tiniest Harvard-educated law clerks."-- Winter Miller
( Cliff Schoenberg had a similar answer.)

            "These
two videotapes: Birth of a Nation and Mandingo ."-- Jon
Hotchkiss
            

            
"Federalist Society lickspittles."-- Jack Hitt (similarly, Norm
Oder )

            "The
various remote controls for Clarence Thomas."-- Noah Meyerson (similarly,
Michael Wilde , Jennifer Miller , and Ken Novak )

            "Penal
implants (cc: New York magazine competition No. 1108, 'Misspellings we'd
like to see')."--Bill Scheft
            

             

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Given: News Quiz
participants respond with particular enthusiasm to questions about the Supreme
Court. Given: The law is a particularly unhappy profession. That is, a
remarkably high percentage of lawyers are discontent with their jobs.
Therefore: Most News Quiz participants are lawyers who take out their
frustrations on a poor Supreme Court justice just because he is a coldhearted,
reactionary bastard with dubious views about race and little understanding of
American life. I have no legal training, but isn't there some kind of logical
error in this paragraph? Because, aside from the dubious propositions, the
unsupported assumptions, and the illogical conclusion, I can't figure out where
I went wrong--just like Justice Scalia.

            
               Courtly Love
Answer
            

            Justice Scalia waved his glasses.

            The court was hearing the first of three cases that
seek to define disability under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, in
particular, whether the act applies to a person who can restore normal
functioning by, for example, taking medication or wearing glasses. And it's as
neat a Catch-22 as you're ever going to see, even through those disposable
contact lenses. In one case, American Airlines declined to hire two workers
based on their uncorrected vision--i.e., glasses off--but argued that the women
couldn't sue because with their vision corrected--i.e., glasses on--they are
not disabled.

            If the court goes with
the broadest possible definition, most Americans would be considered disabled,
ill-mannered, and unattractively dressed, and would rarely be asked out by
people from more stylish countries. If the court goes with the broadest
definition actually under consideration, most Americans could indeed be
considered disabled, but their attractiveness wouldn't be relevant. I blame the
system.

            
               Greg Diamond's Life
in These United States Extra
            

            This is apropos of
nothing, but I've noticed an Internet ad for Bell South using the slogan "The
Real White Pages." Is it a good idea nowadays for any Southern institution to
go around proclaiming itself as "real white"?

            
               Kate Wing's
American Wonderland Extra
            

            Driving through Ted
Turner's bison ranch out near Big Sky (there's an easement through the property
so you can get to a state park on the other side), I saw one of my favorite
warning signs ever. It reads, approximately:

            
               Warning! Bison have sharp horns!
They can run faster than you!
They are not tame! Do not attempt
to pet the bison!
            

            
               Common
Denominators
            

            Scalia as regressive; balls as metaphor; Clarence
Thomas as ventriloquist's dummy.

         
      
   
