
   
   
      
         
            Lord, What Fools

            You need to labor mightily to mess up A
Midsummer Night's Dream , which is the only one of Shakespeare's
masterpieces to be virtually production-proof. It is the most magical of
bedroom farces--the ur-bedroom farce, so vast in scope that a bedroom can't
contain it. Its boudoir is an entire forest, symbolizing Nature itself, where
mortals and fairies, regals and bumpkins, make love and war, where passion
becomes arbitrary and paramours interchangeable; and its last act is a
riotously bungled tragedy-within-a-comedy (a celebratory performance by a
troupe of "rude mechanicals") that's an ironic comment on the trivial pursuits
that have preceded it.

            I've seen Midsummer in a dozen
productions--with adolescents at a drama camp, with high-school students, with
Meryl Streep, with Kenneth Branagh, with contrapuntal Purcell airs and limpid
Mendelssohn strings, in settings romantic and anti-romantic--and it has never
come close to not working. Until now. Michael Hoffman, the director and
"screenwriter" of the all-star movie called William Shakespeare's A
Midsummer Night's Dream (evidently to distinguish it from Stephen King's
A Midsummer Night's Dream ), has wedged the play into a weirdly inapposite
setting, has stupidly cut and even more stupidly embellished it, and has
miscast it almost to a player. And yet the damn thing works: Shakespeare
staggers through, mutilated but triumphant.

            The playwright set
Midsummer in an ancient, vaguely mythological Greece in which
intercourse between mortals and fairies is meant to be commonplace. Titania,
queen of the fairies, has already seduced Theseus, duke of Athens, and the
struggle between her and her mate, Oberon, for possession of an orphaned
changeling boy has generated hurricanes, floods, and "contagious fogs." With
perverse anti-insight, Hoffman has updated the play to a sunny, atmospherically
untroubled Tuscany in the 19 th century and has filled his frames
with scampering street urchins and matrons kneading dough. The fairies that
swirl around these settings, first as Tinkerbell-ish balls of light and then as
conventional storybook sprites, belong to a different age and culture. (The
lines, mysteriously, continue to refer to Athens and Athenians.)

            Hoffman evidently thinks that he has chosen the last
Western society in which a young woman, Hermia (Anna Friel), could plausibly be
threatened with death for not obeying her father's command to marry his choice
of suitors, in this case Demetrius (Christian Bale)--although David
Strathairn's Theseus is such an apologetically lightweight patriarch that the
threat seems incongruous. It doesn't help that Theseus' own erotic pas de deux
with Hippolyta (Sophie Marceau, divested of most of her lines along with her
Amazonian spirit) is less sexually charged than an average coffee
commercial.

            Hoffman adds plenty of
meaningless cinematic bustle, then translates Shakespeare's own set pieces
soggily. The illicit lovers Hermia and Lysander (Dominic West) flee "Athens" on
bicycles, which are supposed to symbolize modern liberation. But once he gets
the couple into the forest, where they're furiously pursued by Demetrius and
his scorned mistress, Helena (Calista Flockhart), their nocturnal circlings
might as well be set in a TV studio--they're stage-bound. Nearly every piece of
comic business is campily extraneous to the text, while the lines are blithely
disregarded. Oberon's famous barbed greeting "Ill met by moonlight, proud
Titania," makes little sense when Titania (Michelle Pfeiffer) sits glowering
behind a curtain. Commanded by Oberon (Rupert Everett) to squeeze the juice of
an aphrodisiac flower into the eye of a man in "Athenian garments," the impish
Puck (Stanley Tucci) falls on a naked Lysander. ("Weeds of Athens he doth
wear," says Puck. Doth not!) Hoffman uses nudity for laughs, to the point where
Theseus' hunting party stumbles on the lovers in their birthday suits--a
discovery that would surely result in their arrest on the spot instead of the
genial interrogation provided by Shakespeare. For reasons only Hoffman
understands, he has saddled Nick Bottom (Kevin Kline), one of Shakespeare's
most delightfully shameless extroverts, with a nagging wife and added bits in
which the braggart is poignantly humiliated by children. Idiocy!

            I can't be sure what Everett's languid, bare-chested Oberon
is up to--posing for a Calvin Klein ad, maybe--and his relationship to Tucci's
jaded, aging frat-boy Puck is that of a prissy gamekeeper to a wayward Alvin
the Chipmunk. Pfeiffer comes off the worst. She can be a great movie actress,
but a key to that greatness is how her dryly sardonic voice--with its edge of
neurotic insecurity--plays against her ethereal features and brings her down to
earth. When she speaks Shakespearean verse, that nervy edge deserts her: She
makes her face a blank and pipes her lines arrhythmically, like a clueless
high-school thespian. Yes, she looks like a dream, with cascading blond curls
framing those exquisitely suspended cheekbones. But every time she opens her
mouth she becomes an airhead.

            The mortals fare better.
Friel and West, a couple of able Brits, actually know how to speak verse,
although Bale is more at home in naturalistic parts. With her twiglike frame
and pinched features, Flockhart is a born Hermia. Cast as the discombobulated
Helena, she does reasonably well: As she demonstrates every week on the dire
Ally McBeal , there's no one more adept at flinging herself into
mortifying situations with masochistic relish.

            Thank heaven for the rustics and for the final act, the
wedding-night performance of "The most Lamentable Comedy and most Cruel Death
of Pyramus and Thisby," which even Hoffman can't completely screw up. At times,
he's in his element. He has devised a neat bit of business for the great Max
Wright, whose speech about impersonating "the horned moon" is now a hasty
impromptu. The tongue-tied lion of Bill Irwin is so eloquent in his
inarticulateness that I never wanted him to leave the stage. Roger Rees, under
a heavy barbershop mustache, is the sweetest Peter Quince imaginable--both
Bottom's biggest fan and his most sympathetic critic. And even Hoffman's
sentimental interpolations can't strangle the comic spirit of Kevin Kline. The
beauty of Kline's Bottom is its childlike straightforwardness and simplicity.
Kline understands that whatever happens, Bottom remains essentially himself:
The ass's head makes him more serenely Bottom-like. His "Bottom's Dream" speech
is a joyous discovery of the dreamlike essence of life--a truth unglimpsed by
any of the play's other characters. It's too bad that Hoffman belabors the
point by giving Bottom a tender finale in which he stares moist-eyed into the
moon. At moments like that, you can almost see the ass's head materialize on
the director.

         
      
   
