
   
   
      
         
            Shattered Illusions

            The humanitarian disaster
in Kosovo and the downing of a U.S. stealth bomber in Serbia dominated world
coverage of the NATO campaign against Yugoslavia Monday. The scale of "ethnic
cleansing" in response to the NATO air attacks caused widespread alarm in
Europe, and the loss of the U.S. Air Force F117-A attack plane was seen as
further evidence that an air war is not enough to secure NATO's objectives. In
Italy, the main western European destination for Albanian refugees, the
newspapers gave far greater prominence to the NATO estimate that more than
500,000 Albanian Kosovars have been forced to leave their homes since the Serb
repression began.

            Reports from the front
were emotive. La
Repubblica of Rome began its front-page report from Djankovic on the
Macedonia-Yugoslav border as follows: "Mass executions, psychological and
physical torture, rapes, devastation, sackings, and extermination camps. Kosovo
is living through a nightmare of the greatest ethnic cleansing that has ever
been attempted. Half a million people in flight, hundreds of dead, towns and
villages completely cut out of the world without water, electricity, telephone,
or food. A humanitarian catastrophe without precedent."

            Condemnations of the air war, in which the Italian air
force has now been ordered not to participate, were multiplying in the Italian
press. La Stampa
of Turin carried two front-page comments Monday demanding the air strikes be
ended. Boris Biancheri, a former Italian ambassador to Washington, wrote that
justice for the Albanian Kosovars could now only be restored "on a field of
rubble." He wrote, "Let's end this war. But let's be careful in future not to
promise what we are not willing to carry out, not to proclaim rights if we
don't have the strength, the will, or what might be called the recklessness to
punish those who have violated them."

            The other comment in
La Stampa , by Gianni Vattimo, said it would not be dishonorable to
admit--as in other cases like Vietnam and Iraq--than an error might have been
made. "Perhaps the best we can do now is to use the resources that would be
wasted in war in an agreed humanitarian action of evacuation and assistance to
the refugees," Vattimo said. While this would risk helping Slobodan Milosevic
to achieve his objectives, it was perhaps what the Kosovar refugees now dying
of hunger and cold would want us to do, he added. On the front page of
Corriere
della Sera , Alberto Ronchey supported the Economist 's conclusion
that "the West has embarked on one of its riskiest adventures since World War
II."

            The French press gave prominence to President Jacques
Chirac's efforts to get the Russians to bring Milosevic back the negotiating
table, and an editorial in Monday's Libération suggested this should be done by greatly
reducing the area of Kosovo destined to become autonomous under the Rambouillet
proposals. This could save the face of both Milosevic and NATO, he wrote. The
air war had already had the opposite of its intended effect, he added. It
revealed "a terrible impotence" against ethnic cleansing that risked becoming a
sinister example not only for the Balkans but for the rest of the world.

            The question of what
NATO, given the current Western resistance to the committal of ground troops,
would do if 10 or even 20 days of bombing failed to bow Milosevic was raised in
the Germany's Frankfurter
Allgemeine , and an editorial in El País of Madrid concluded that the crisis is getting ever
more complicated and that we are now in a "thick fog."

            The British papers continue to be generally more gung-ho
than those on the Continent. The Times of London, urging "an immediate intensification
of military activities aimed directly at the Yugoslav army" in Kosovo, said in
an editorial Monday that it is not so evident that the "Somalia Syndrome"
"really affects ordinary Americans as much as it distracts their nervous
elected representatives." It said that "the ironic outcome is a set of aircraft
[the stealth bombers] that are so dependent on extremely sophisticated computer
equipment designed to deceive the enemy that they are extraordinarily difficult
to fly."

            The Financial Times (which led Monday
with the news that BP Amoco, the United Kingdom's largest company, was about to
take over Atlantic Richfield of the United States in an all-stock deal worth
$25 billion) carried a front-page headline "America's illusions crash with
downed stealth" and said that TV images of the wreckage have shattered "the
illusion enjoyed by Americans for years that the US military's technologically
superlative weaponry meant it could destroy unseen enemies with little or no
danger to American life or property." The mass-circulation tabloid Sun
said Britain was committed to this war because "the Butcher of Belgrade cannot
be allowed to continue his massacre of the innocents," while the London
Evening Standard said that "having come so far, and having
got ourselves into this mess--and it is a terrible and bloody mess--we must see
it through."

            

               For more Kosovo coverage, click .
            

             

         
      
   
