
   
   
      
         
             War of Wills

            Amid the saturation
coverage of NATO's bombing of Yugoslavia, the Serbian point of view is nowhere
to be seen. This weekend, while American military and foreign policy officials
made the rounds of the Sunday talk shows, the only air time a Serbian spokesman
could get was a brief interview on CNN. It looks as though the media are
helping NATO win the war for American hearts and minds. But the real PR war
isn't about which side is right. It's about which side is choosing the course
of the conflict, and which side is imposing the consequences. And in that war
the American media are helping the Serbs.

            Virtually the first
question posed on every talk show Sunday was the same. "One of the unfortunate
consequences of our bombing seems to have been to unleash a bloodbath, where
the Serbs, military, paramilitary, are storming into Kosovo and driving people
away," Tim Russert declared on Meet the Press . "Some are suggesting that
the first phase of the air campaign has only intensified the alleged ethnic
cleansing, the atrocities being committed in Kosovo," Wolf Blitzer added on
Late Edition . On Face the Nation , Bob Schieffer suggested that
NATO's bombing "has simply backfired."

            American officials disputed these suggestions, but the
underlying damage was done: The ethnic cleansing in Kosovo was framed as a
"consequence" of the bombing. This is the opposite of how the United States
envisioned the story: Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic was the actor, and
NATO was imposing the consequences. It's "an upside-down argument to think that
NATO or we have made this get worse," sputtered U.S. Secretary of State
Madeleine Albright when confronted on Face the Nation with the charge
that the bombing had backfired. "Milosevic is the one that is to blame. He is
the one that is making it worse. And what we were trying to do is to make sure
that he pays the heaviest price for what he is doing."

            The bombing can make
Milosevic pay a price, but it can't necessarily break his will. The longer he
holds out at home and escalates the genocide in Kosovo, the more the American
media pronounce the bombing a failure. "Allied Action Fails to Stop Serb
Brutality," says Wednesday's Washington Post front page. The New York
Times raises the possibility that Milosevic's defiance shows the bombing
strategy was "fatally flawed" and adds that "NATO officials here are on the
defensive, insisting day after day that it was not their bombing that sparked
the Serbian attacks or the huge civilian forced exodus from Kosovo."

            The bombing was supposed to force Milosevic to accept a
peace plan that would grant limited autonomy to the ethnic Albanians in Kosovo.
But Milosevic has shredded the peace plan by fomenting so much hatred between
Serbs and ethnic Albanians that coexistence is impossible. Instead, having
driven the ethnic Albanians from their homes, he's offering to let them
return--and even to remove "some" of his troops from Kosovo--if NATO halts its
bombing first. By framing NATO as the actor and the Serbs as the enforcers of
consequences, Milosevic gets to define the options and their costs. Rather than
play NATO's game--autonomy or bombing--he's creating a new game: ethnic
cleansing or bombing. In the new game, all NATO gets for backing off is what it
had in the first place.

            Milosevic is making
steady progress in turning the game upside down. European NATO leaders have
stopped demanding that he sign the peace plan and have started demanding merely
that he "stop his repression." "We are going to continue the bombing until we
can guarantee that the killings stop and will not restart," NATO
Secretary-General Javier Solana declared Tuesday. The new offer implicitly
emerging from the Europeans is: Stop the cleansing and we'll stop the
bombing.

            Will Milosevic play NATO's game or vice versa? That depends
on which side's will breaks first, which in turn depends on each side's
assessment of the strength of the other's will, which in turn depends on how
the media portray their morale. While the Times editorializes on Page
A28 that "NATO must muster all the air power it can and use it against Mr.
Milosevic's murderous troops," its front-page headline--"On 7 th Day,
Serb Resilience Gives NATO Leaders Pause"--gives him a huge lift. The media
also help Milosevic by playing up cracks within NATO over how far each member
country is willing to pursue the bombing. Knowing the limits of NATO's will
bolsters Milosevic's confidence and helps him dictate the terms of the
game.

            President Clinton did his
best Tuesday to reframe the war in NATO's terms. The ethnic cleansing isn't a
consequence of the bombing but was planned long beforehand, Clinton argued. The
Serbs' terms for ending the bombing are "unacceptable," he added, and NATO is
"united" and "determined to stay with our policy." If Milosevic continues the
cleansing, said Clinton, he will suffer further costs: the devastation of his
military and the loss of Yugoslavian sovereignty over Kosovo. And by
accelerating the bombing, NATO is warning Milosevic that it is willing to match
him escalation for escalation. Eventually, the consequences will become
unbearable to one side or the other. It's a head game. War always is.

            

               For more Kosovo coverage, click .
            

         
      
   
