
   
   
      
         
            No. 248: &quot;Re Place&quot;

            
               According to
Justice Anthony Kennedy, it's a place where people "practice newly learned
vulgarities, erupt with anger, tease and embarrass each other, share offensive
notes, flirt, push and shove in the halls, grab and offend." Where is this
wonderful, magical place?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Monday's Question
(No. 247)--"Does This Look Inflected?":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 The author of a new
book charges that a prominent American not only betrayed him, but also "[h]is
mocking pronunciation of my name ... sounded like a jeering mob." Who is this
insensitive American, and how did he mispronounce the author's
name?
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            "Tom
Selleck. And he was complaining about the insinuating way that little English
guy used to call him 'Magnum' on Magnum P.I. Just between you and me,
this Selleck seems pretty sensitive for a he-man."-- Chris Kelly
            

             

            
"Aren't we all insensitive Americans when we say 'NetanYAHOO'? Or worse,
'NetanLOSER'?"-- Molly Shear Gabel ( H Nelson had a similar
answer.)

            "The
author in question was self-help guru Rajesh Ajeerinmob, who should really be
less sensitive, in my opinion."--Bill Wasik
            

            "It's
Bob Dole, and he pronounced the author's name as 'Liddy.' "-- Mark
Craven
            

            
"Randy, I've been rethinking that 'he-man' stuff I said about Tom Selleck. It
wasn't fair. Some of butchest guys around go all atwitter when ladies ask them
about their guns. Remember that time you and Gary Cooper and I were having
fondue at Hedda Hopper's house and she just wouldn't let up on Coop about the
hunting? That was the fourth- or fifth-worst time I ever saw him
cry."-- Chris Kelly
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            A Wang, a Dong, a Pun, and not just a Pun, a Big Ho
Pun--such is the provincial, infantile, cross-cultural fun available to anyone
with a Manhattan phone book and a cold heart. Imagine the torments of Robert
Fatty, Charles Fatone, Jennifer Bigham, or Antonio Bigas whose schooldays must
have consisted largely of correcting his teacher as she called the roll.
There's Brook Sissay (that's Sissay , like a really rich French sissy)
who we can only hope finds sympathy and comfort in the arms of page-mate Gerald
Shittko.

            What recourse is available to these sufferers?
None. Tolerate those boorish mispronunciations and look like a sap. Or say
something--You're doing that on purpose! Quit it! I'm telling Mom!--and look
like a bigger sap. Hopeless.

            Of course, no sophisticated person would indulge in
this kind of childish mockery. And so I'm going to make a long overdue phone
call of apology right now, to Ms. Helene Lickdyke.

            Now we are 6.

            
               Treacherous
Back-Stabbing Answer
            

            President Clinton deliberately mispronounced it
"Boo-trus, Boo-trus," just to mock him, charges former U.N. Secretary-General
Boutros Boutros-Ghali.

            The pink bellies, the short-sheeting, the midnight
deliveries of two dozen pizzas he didn't even order--had any of these actually
been mentioned in Boutros-Ghali's book they too would have been part of
Clinton's plan to deny him a second term as secretary-general during Clinton's
own 1996 campaign, out of fear for Bob Dole, who was accusing the
administration of cooperation with international bodies. Bastards!

            And that liar Madeleine Albright was even worse. In
Unvanquished: A U.S.-U.N. Saga , Boutros-Ghali asserts that the wily
secretary of state sought to unseat him "with determination, letting pass no
opportunity to demolish my authority and tarnish my image all the while showing
a serene face, wearing a friendly smile and repeating expressions of
friendships and admiration through the poutiest ruby lips I have ever beheld.
Except, of course, for the part about the lips, which look though you may, you
will not find in this book, for I did not write such nonsense. Aiee, this
paradox makes my head ache. And I didn't write that either. Or that last
bit."

            (Note: The actual book
quotation ends with the word "admiration.")

            
               Ads Up
Extra
            

            Which of the following
are from those twee little ads in The New Yorker , and which are
two-bedroom apartments with WBFP, RivVu, SWM, and ... no wait, sorry--which are
crude travesties?

            1. Adopt Me! I'm a smart,
charming, rare Gloucestershire Old Spots Pig. Adopt me for $25 and help fund
...

            2. Swim at Home ...

            3. Swim in other people's
homes while they're summering in Tuscany, out for the evening, or just sleeping
soundly ...

            4. Adopt Me! I'm a portly
old fool from Hampshire. Adopt me for $350,000 and help fund the whiskey and
...

            5. A different kind of
Khaki ... price $350

            6. Superb Handmade
Tie--"Petrol" Crisp, elegant black & white puppytooth. $95

            7. Sock Garters Handmade
in England--"Sir Ankleton" ... $85

            8. Upton Tea
Importers--purveyor of the World's Finest Teas

            9. Unabridged AudioBooks
Read in plummy English accent ...

            10. Lighthouse Pin a
beloved coastal beacon made by James Breakell in sterling silver $30. 14k gold
$200

            11. Discrete Unattractive
Jewelry ...

            12.
The Inn on Princess Margaret's Lap ...

            
               Actual
Ads
            

            
               1, 2, 5, 6, 8,
10.
            

            
               Mark Gibbens'
Headline Haiku
            

            Wary Iowans
not socked
G-string flashers
Boost disaster.

            
               --Madison Capital Times , May 20, 1999

         
      
   
