
   
   
      
         
            No. 204: &quot;Stay!&quot;

            

               Who said this to whom about what: "Keep on doing what you're doing, and
don't call us, we'll call you."
            

             

            by 5
p.m. ET Sunday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               
                  Monday's Question
(No. 203)--"Gloat, Little Gloat Worm":
               

               

                  Mattel, Al Gore, Landry's Seafood Restaurants, and Cruel
Intentions can all make the same boast. What?
               

               "All
can be purchased in Beijing."-- Daniel Radosh ( Greg Diamond and
David Ballard had a similar answer.)

               "They
are each based on a Jane Austen novel. (I could be wrong about Cruel
Intentions .)"-- Andrew Silow-Carroll
               

               "Four
things that drove Stanley Kubrick into self-imposed exile."-- Beth
Sherman
               

               "Each
would have had more effect on the Balkans peace process than Bob Dole
did."--Joe Lengieza
               

               "One
makes Skipper. One wakes Tipper. One bakes Flipper. And one ... to take a guess
at what Peter Travers said in Rolling Stone , is 'like Les Liaisons
Dangereuses , but much, much hipper!' "-- Meg Wolitzer
               

               Click
for more answers.

               
                  Randy's
Wrap-Up
               

               Ah, the smell of it. Many
of you wallowed in the olfactory, particularly in the odor of corruption and
fish. (If News Quiz were played by dogs, what a merry romp that would be!
Crazy, hey? I give the Cabinet secretary; you give the scent.) Oscar nominee
William Shakespeare alludes to fish aroma when he says, "Something is rotten in
the state of Denmark." His was another example of the bisexual symbolism of
fish; it is one of the few things used to represent both male and female
genitalia. "Stinking fish" was a derogatory Elizabethan reference to vaginal
odor; and cod--as in cod piece--was slang for penis. Perhaps the fish is such a
flexible metaphor because the general shape of its body is phallic, while its
open mouth suggests the vagina. So, who's hungry? Anybody up for seafood?

               
                  Inductive,
Funductive Answer
               

               As Pamela Weishaar knew (click for more Pamela
Weishaar), "We're No. 2!"

               Mattel, the nation's No. 1 toy company will become
its second largest consumer software producer, behind Microsoft, when it
completes its purchase of the Learning Company for $3.8 billion.

               Al Gore requires no explanation except, perhaps, for
his astonishing physical grace. The man moves like a young panther.

               Landry's is No. 2 in what the restaurant industry
calls the "casual seafood" category. Last week, Landry's agreed to buy
Consolidated Restaurants for $84 million in stock and $80 million in assumed
debt, giving Landry's control over The Spaghetti Warehouse. For my money,
nothing says good eating like "warehouse."

               
                  Cruel Intentions
was No. 2 at the box office this past weekend in what the movie industry calls
the "dim-witted teen remake" category. ( Analyze This was No. 1.)

               
                  You Be the MBA
Extra
               

               I give the revealing
detail; you give the corporation.

               
                  Revealing Detail
               

               1. Fourth quarter operating earnings fell 27
percent.

               2. Laying off thousands of the lowest-paid
workers.

               3. Last year's pay for two co-chairmen exceeds $26
million each.

               4. Head of the corporation says linchpin of
long-term strategic development is: "talent, talent, talent, talent,
talent."

               5. Board of directors
damned to hell for all eternity.

               
                  Answers
               

               1-3. All refer to Citigroup.

               4. Quotes Charlotte Beers, new chairwoman of J.
Walter Thompson advertising.

               5. Is conjectural; check
with your spiritual leader.

               
                  Common
Denominators
               

               Plastic parts and fish
fragrance.

            

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of Slate and will be
published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may
publish your name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
