
   
   
      
         
            Bathing Suit vs. Birthday Suit

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               Dear Prudie,
            

            
               Here's the scoop.
Our female boss (she's in her 40s like the 15 guys and gals who work for her)
is installing a new, rather large hot tub at her and her husband's secluded
home. All 15 of us have been invited to a picnic/hot tub grand opening party,
to use her words. She said, "Of course, nobody will be wearing suits, so don't
bother bringing them." We feel pressured to attend and partake in the nude
socializing in and outside the tub. Some of us are completely comfortable,
others are less sure. Your thoughts?
            

            
-- Wondering
            

            Dear Won,

            Do not naked into that hot tub go. Your boss must
have oatmeal cookies for brains as well as a complete lack of judgment.

            It sounds to Prudie as though you are not the only
one feeling uncomfortable with the birthday-suit event. Luckily, you have
options.You and the crew from the office can all agree to bring suits--and so
inform Nature Girl. If you're not all in agreement, which may be the case
because you say, "Some of us are completely comfortable," then you can decline
... either with an explanation or without one. If you totally chicken out about
stating your reservations, there is always the 24-hour flu.

            Prudie assures you there
is no need to feel "pressured." There can be no retaliation for employees who
choose not to socialize in the altogether with their co-workers. As Prudie's
aunt used to say, "The very idea."

            
--Prudie, resolutely

            
               Dear Prudie,
            

            
               My girlfriend is perfect, but ... Ah, it's
always the big but. What's my big but? Fun, smart, beautiful, but my girlfriend
just won't give me any space. If we don't spend seven evenings a week together,
if we don't talk on the phone each day during work, if I want to spend any time
alone, my girlfriend pouts and gets angry, or cries.
            

            
               We have talked about this over and over again
(and almost broke up over it several times), and she is getting better, but ...
I put my foot down and insisted that there are just times I need to be by
myself, and while she accepts that in principle, I often feel on my guard, as
she often gets extremely upset with little provocation if I don't give her
enough attention.
            

            
               Can this hostile
dependency be cured? Can I, should I, even, expect her to change? I hate the
idea that I love her "except for this one thing I want to change," but really,
she is absolutely wonderful. Except that too much of a good thing is still too
much.
            

            

               --
               Sated and Then Stuffed
            

            Dear Sate,

            It is interesting that you write Prudie that your
inamorata is demanding and wants to spend every minute together--which is not
what you want--but that she is "absolutely wonderful." This is like saying the
soufflé is the most delicious one ever, save for the ground glass mixed in.

            Lovers are not reform
schools and you will not get your "perfect ... but" girlfriend to change this
aspect of her personality. This leaves you two choices. You can accept her
possessiveness and kiss time to yourself goodby, or ring off now and preserve
some autonomy. If you choose the first option, Prudie predicts your
hostility will build until you wind up choosing the latter. This woman's
demands suggest an underlying jealousy and immaturity that time will most
likely aggravate. It's your call.

            
--Prudie, honestly

            
               Dear Prudie,
            

            
               I have a very close friend (we were in junior
high together in 1984) who seems to have just dropped out of society. He
doesn't look for work, having been let go from his last job. He rarely washes,
smokes and drinks too much (amongst other similar vices), and spends the time
he's not watching infomercials until 4 a.m., pining over a girl who broke up
with him long ago. He's living off unemployment, and that's going to run out
soon. 
               Oh, did I mention? He's living on my couch.
            

            
               To his credit, he's not hard to live with. He
cleans up after himself, gives me my space, and doesn't eat too much of my
food, and when he does he eventually replaces it. Plus, he's great company.
We've got very similar sense of humor and we have great conversations.
            

            
               I guess what kills
me is that he's a talented, smart, able guy and he's just tossing it away
without a care. He doesn't hit me up for money, but I'm a little worried with
the government funds ending in a month. I've tried hints from subtle to overt
that I don't really approve of what he's doing, but I don't want to kick him
out. Any advice?
            

            

               --Friend in Need
            

            Dear Fren,

            And you are a friend, indeed. You are also clearly
conflicted. Your roommate is an unemployed, unmotivated, slovenly vidiot who
smokes and drinks while being fixated on a long gone girlfriend. He is also
depressed. You find him, however, a good-humored chap who's a great
conversationalist, as well as someone who replenishes the groceries.When you
say he is "tossing it away without a care," you are telling Prudie you would
give anything to redo this guy's thinking. But alas, you can't. We each get a
life to make of it what we will ... and this is what he's doing with his.

            You say you don't want
to kick him out and also mention that his unemployment benefits are soon to
end. Be prepared for this sad fellow to become your ward if you don't insist he
get some mental health help and leave your nest to make a life.

            
--Prudie, realistically

            
               Dear
Prudence,
            

            
               I'm an 18-year-old
student majoring in psychology. I like psych but don't love it. What I really
want to be is a singer, but my parents are against it. I know I'll never be as
happy as a psychologist as I would be as a singer. I have the talent but not
the moral support. I have been tempted many times to run away from home because
my parents are unsupportive of my ambition. I'm embarrassed because I can't
stand up for myself.
            

            

               --Carpe Diem
            

            Dear Carp,

            Prudie, too, is for seizing the diem, so give your
dream a try and go for it. You are only 18, after all, which gives you a few
years to play with.

            Prudie is taking you at your word that you have
talent -- though sometimes even that isn't enough to achieve your goal. But
forget your parents' opposition and trust your instinct. Whether you make it or
not as a singer, you will not have to look back and regret that you never
tried. And P.S.: It is not considered "running away from home" when one is 18.
That is the age, after all, when people go to college or into the military.

            If good fortune strikes,
send Prudie a CD.

            
--Prudie, melodically

            
               Dear Prudie,
            

            
               I think I hate my
job. I must hate my job because I dread getting up every weekday
morning. I have used all my personal days and my sick days, which is making me
feel trapped and frantic. What should I do?
            

            

               --Freaked
            

            Dear Freak,

            You've used up all your
sick days? Well, you could always call in Dead. Then you should quit. Prudie
can imagine nothing more sad-making than to loathe one's job. Use an employment
agency, the want ads, friends, anything, but find a more satisfying way to keep
body and soul together.

            --Prudie, gainfully

         
      
   
