
   
   
      
         
             Dress To Thrill

            Coming to work on the bus the other day, I sat
across the aisle from a woman who was probably in her 50s. She was plain
looking and plainly dressed. I guessed her to be a household worker. Her slip
was showing. That is not unusual. What struck me was that the hem of her slip
was lace.

            I spontaneously said to myself, "What a pitiful
attempt at elegance!" But when I got off the bus and ruminated on it, I
realized that was a condescending and stupid reaction. She was saying
something. She was saying; "I'm not just a two-legged vacuum cleaner or
dishwasher. I'm a person who deserves to be respected and loved."

            That bit of lace made a big difference to her. It
was the difference between a work uniform and private, personal dress. Wearing
the lace was a decision she had made for herself, beyond the requirements of
her working life. She was expressing her membership in a class of people who
have a life beyond work and who have some bit of "fancy" in their dress to show
it.

            To whom was she making this statement? To herself,
of course. There may have been someone else--a husband or a boyfriend. But
first of all she was making it for herself, to make herself feel good.

            How do I know this,
Watson? I have not interviewed her nor spoken any word to her. But I imagine
that is the way people are. I imagine that people want to think of themselves
as belonging to a group that they admire or respect and dress as they think a
member of that group dresses. Their object is not to display their
individuality, except that they want to choose their group. I don't believe
that people in China were happy all wearing the same Mao jackets, because that
did not express membership in a group that they had chosen. I understand that
under those Mao jackets there were frequently bits of colorful clothing that
reflected more private choices.

            The message of the clothing is first of all to the wearer.
I think of those girls in West Side Story singing "I Feel Pretty!" They
didn't sing "I'm So Pretty." The important thing for them was to feel
pretty, and they associated the way they dressed with the feeling of being
pretty.

            We see all the young
women--and some not-so-young--walking around in the office district in short,
black dresses and shoes with built-up, chunky heels. For many of them, that is
not the most becoming outfit they could wear. That depends on how good their
legs are. And they are surely not expressing individuality. They are expressing
their membership in a class of women who are smart, professional, liberated,
and also feminine and sexy. They are expressing it to themselves and to
whomever may be looking.

            At the street corner there is a group of young men with
exceedingly droopy trousers and black, high shoes. The laces flopping loosely.
They are imitating prison dress. In their way--which may be entirely peaceful
and law-abiding--they are showing their solidarity with those who thumb their
noses at the mores of bourgeois society.

            What about all those men
you see in gray slacks and navy blue blazers with brass buttons? They are
ever-young alumni of Eastern colleges--or want to feel they are. They are proud
to be "Scarsdale Galahads," "Brooks Brothers types," despite the disdain with
which those words are used in Guys and Dolls .

            Of course, the extreme in men's dress is the dinner jacket.
All men--at least, the ones I know--say they hate to have to get into that
monkey suit. They curse as they struggle with the bow tie. But is there a man
with a soul so dead, or a waist so big, that he does not smile and say, "Bond,
James Bond," when he looks at himself in the mirror fully attired?

            When I was in the Nixon
administration, we were all very buttoned-down during the week. On Saturdays,
however, when only the "responsible" people, the presidential appointees, came
to work in the White House and the Executive Office Building, casual dress was
the uniform. That was our way of showing, to ourselves especially, that we were
intimates of those eminent locations.

            And what about me now? On the days I go to my office, I
wear a flannel shirt with no necktie if the weather is cool. In warm weather, I
wear an open-necked sport shirt with no jacket. Some people have said that I
dress "Israeli style," but that isn't really it. I am asserting my membership
in the club of "Old Geezers." We have paid our dues. We are free of
obligations, including the obligation to dress like everyone else. We know that
our dress is only a trivial sign of our liberation, but it is a sign we
enjoy.

            So, hail to you, my lace-bedecked bus mate! May you
always be elegant to yourself, as you will always be to me.

         
      
   
