
   
   
      
         
            Kissinger's Dream Comes True

            Peace
hopes run highest in Germany, where Die Welt and Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung both led Wednesday with upbeat
reports on the new flurry of diplomatic activity over Kosovo. Die Welt
quoted German Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer as saying the next few days will
be "decisive." The paper also reported strong speculation that German Defense
Minister Rudolf Scharping will be the next secretary-general of NATO,
succeeding Spaniard Javier Solana, who is expected to be appointed this week as
the first foreign policy supremo of the European Union. His official title will
be "high representative" for European foreign and security policy, but
according to the Financial
Times of London, he is already colloquially known as "Mr. Pesc" after
the French acronym for the job.

            In an
editorial Wednesday, the FT described Solana as an excellent choice for
a position that requires "both a sure-footed diplomat and a super-salesman." It
said, "Mr. Solana will be the European on the end of the telephone to take
calls from Washington--a figure whose absence was always bemoaned by Henry
Kissinger." A front-page report
in the International Herald
Tribune of Paris said U.S. officials are confident that Solana "would
help guarantee that EU military cooperation fits with NATO and does not
challenge the Western alliance's primacy in European security."

            Having
apparently forgotten that only last week they ruled out Yugoslav President
Slobodan Milosevic as a negotiating partner because of his indictment for war
crimes, most British newspapers were taking this week's Belgrade talks very
seriously. "Crunch talks on Kosovo" was the main headline in the liberal
Guardian ,
which said the discussions will decide whether NATO halts the bombing or
launches a ground war. "Vital hours for Kosovo peace" said the Times . The Daily
Telegraph noted
that the European Union's negotiator, Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari, is
the first Western leader to visit Belgrade since the start of the bombing
campaign March 24 and that "hopes were higher than at any time." But the
Independent 's Kosovo lead
was the killing of Yugoslavia's deputy air force commander, Gen. Ljubisa
Velickovic, in a NATO air raid. It called this a "success" to be weighed
against NATO's continuing "blunders."

            
Another military blunder made the front page of the South China Morning Post of
Hong Kong. This was the death of 10 pupils during Indian shelling of a school
in Kashmir. As India's efforts to evict Pakistan-backed Muslim guerrillas from
the disputed territory entered the seventh day, the daily Dawn of Pakistan led on
Pakistani troops repelling three cross-border raids that India denied had taken
place. In New Delhi, the Asian Age led on a much-criticized statement by Indian
Defense Minister George Fernandes that India would consider granting the
guerrillas safe passage back to Pakistan. But Fernandes insisted that "all
those who have been pushed into our territory by Pakistan, including their
troops, have to go back, dead or alive." The Indian press has generally advised
against any escalation of the war, and the Times of
India ran an editorial Wednesday discounting a much-reported remark by
the Pakistani foreign minister that "we will not hesitate to use any weapon in
our arsenal to defend our territorial integrity." Pakistan was "crying nuclear
wolf," the paper said. The nuclear gap between the two countries has widened in
India's favor: "Pakistan's generals may not mind sacrificing a few hundred of
their soldiers and Afghan mercenaries to Indian air strikes, but they are not
going to expose their own cities to needless risk."

            Back
to Kosovo: The conservative National Post of Canada ran a tough editorial Wednesday saying that acceptance of Milosevic's
position on the implementation of the G-8 peace plan would be "little better
than a surrender in stages. ... Rather than attempting to dictate the niggling
terms of peacekeeping, Mr. Milosevic should be obliged to negotiate on the
broader subject of Kosovo's future as an independent state--which has not yet
been discussed at all," it said. The Times of London was equally tough.
Milosevic's "purported acceptance" of the G-8 "general principles" is
"meaningless in itself, notable only as a hint of desperation," it said in an
editorial. The only reason for the Finnish president going to Belgrade was "to
spell out exactly what Yugoslavia has to do to meet NATO's own clear demands in
full." But if Milosevic "still needs more clearly to be told, the truth is best
conveyed by bombs and by the speedy reinforcement of NATO troops on the
ground."

            In
Europe, the other main stories were to do with food. Le Soir of Brussels led with
the resignation of two Belgian government ministers after a food scare over the
sale of chickens and eggs containing high levels of cancer-causing dioxins. The
story was given wide coverage throughout Europe, with Corriere della Sera of
Milan reporting on its front page that European Union authorities were planning
the destruction of chickens and eggs from 416 Belgian farms and possibly also
from some farms in France, Holland, and Germany that used contaminated Belgian
poultry feed pellets. In Britain, a long-running controversy over genetically
modified (GM) crops took on aspects of a constitutional battle after Prince
Charles defied Prime Minister Tony Blair by publishing an article Tuesday in
the Daily Mail criticizing the regulations governing their production.
Blair has repeatedly insisted that genetically modified foods are safe, but the
heir to the throne attacked the lack of independent scientific research and
said the regulations were not tough enough. The Times reported that
Prince Charles is "infuriated" by government efforts to portray anti-GM
campaigners as hysterics. As a patron of the Soil Association, which campaigns
for organic food, the prince is also said to be upset by an article written by
the government's chief scientific adviser saying the Soil Association was run
by "ayatollahs" as a "theological movement."

            China's Wenhui
Daily reported Tuesday that Sang Lan, the Chinese gymnast paralyzed at last
year's Goodwill Games in New York, has accused CNN of failing to help her. Sang
said the organizers, Turner Sports, assured her they would cover all costs
after a highly publicized vaulting accident July 21 left her with severe spinal
cord damage. "In the end, they didn't produce a penny," she told the paper.

         
      
   
