
   
   
      
         
            London Calling

            On Broadway, where
distinguished American writers complain that it's nearly impossible to get
their plays produced, the British dramatist David Hare has opened no fewer than
four in the past 12 months. Last spring, Hare's play about Oscar Wilde, The
Judas Kiss , came from London. It was followed this winter by his adaptation
The Blue Room , which made the cover of Newsweek on the backside,
as it were, of Nicole Kidman. At the moment, Hare occupies two stages in New
York. Amy's View , starring Judi Dench, is playing to full houses at the
Ethel Barrymore Theatre, while Hare himself is performing a monologue about
Israel, Via Dolorosa , at the Booth Theatre.

            It shouldn't come as any
surprise that American audiences have a taste for British drama. Stage envy is
a well-trod Anglophilic path, which has in the last few years widened into a
mostly one-way superhighway stretching from London's West End to the New York
Theater District. Current productions that have breezed down it include The
Weir , by the young Irish playwright Conor McPherson, and Closer , by
Patrick Marber. Lately, we Americans even seem more interested in our own
playwrights when we see them reflected back at us by the Brits. Revivals of
Tennessee Williams' early work Not About Nightingales and Eugene
O'Neill's The Iceman Cometh , starring Kevin Spacey, are both English
imports. In a recent discussion in the Sunday "Arts & Leisure" section,
three New York Times drama critics discussed this phenomenon. Basically,
they all concluded that British is better.

            But Hare, who now dominates Broadway in a way Tom Stoppard
never has, may illustrate a somewhat different phenomenon. There is, of course,
an element of Anglomania in his success here. But I think it may also speak to
something more interesting. Hare feeds an appetite for a theater engaged with
society, which our domestic dramatic economy isn't satisfying at the moment. He
is in almost every way an old-fashioned playwright, who uses dramatic form to
amplify questions of politics, religion, society, and relations between the
sexes. And while I think that even Hare's best work falls short of greatness,
the combination of his seriousness and his success bode well for theater as a
form on both sides of the Atlantic.

            Hare's early work has the
reputation for being left-wing agitprop. In fact, while less skillful than his
later efforts, his early plays are not mere polemics. Hare's first produced
play, Slag (1970), is a kind of dystopian fantasy about radical
feminism, in which the attempt to run a girls' school dissolves into absurd
infighting. It is true that the author's Labor Party socialism originally took
the not-very-novel form of negative portrayals of establishment institutions
and the residue of British imperialism. But what soon began to distinguish him
from a lot of his like-minded contemporaries were a low-key wit and an ability
to write memorable roles for women. Hare's first play to open at the National
Theatre in London in 1978 (and currently being revived there) was
Plenty , later made into a film with Meryl Streep. Streep plays the role
of Susan Traherne, a woman who works undercover in France during World War II
and subsequently finds herself unable to cope with postwar British life.
Despite her craziness, we see that she has a point.

            His radicalism mellowed with time and success. Where once
he proposed a debate between between socialism and capitalism, between the
Third World and the First as in Map of the World (1983), Hare's later
plays posit a subtler conflict over personal and political values. The first
time he really demonstrated this maturity was in The Secret Rapture
(1988), a work Hare himself has pointed to as an important departure. It's
about two sisters who have to deal with the messy legacy of their departed
father. One is generous and impractical. The other is ruthless and
self-interested in a Thatcherite vein but nonetheless sympathetic in the end.
Frank Rich, then the lead drama critic for the New York Times , who liked
the play when it debuted in London, wrote a harsh review of the New York
production and especially of the performance by the author's then-girlfriend
Blair Brown. An embittered Hare pledged not to bring another play to New York
until Rich stopped reviewing.

            In following years, Hare
became more interested in the soul of Britain under Thatcherism. In the early
1990s, he wrote a trilogy of "State of the Nation" plays: Racing Demon ,
about the Church of England, Murmuring Judges , about the legal system,
and The Absence of War , about the Labor Party. All opened to acclaim at
the National Theatre and provoked national debate in Britain. Racing
Demon, a play about Anglican priests, even came to New York once Rich moved
on. Why, you have to ask, is it so seldom that important-seeming American plays
address societal issues such as these? You might start with the fact that the
United States, unlike Britain, has no centralized national theater, either
literally or figuratively. What occurs on the New York stage doesn't resonate
around the country, or even down the Amtrak corridor to Washington. And you
might add that the political interests of American playwrights tend to revolve
more around issues of identity and less around national institutions.

            We also have a different kind of theatrical tradition,
which is less talky and intellectualized than the British one. The playwright
whom Hare harks back to most directly is George Bernard Shaw. Though his wit is
not of Shavian sharpness, his plays are in another sense more sophisticated.
Where Shaw's characters tend to represent views pitted against each other,
Hare's cannot resist becoming genuine characters--contradictory, quirky, and
imperfect both as heroes and villains. The play where one sees this most
clearly is Skylight (1995), for my money his most successful work. It's
the classic Hare setup, a collision between two people who see life differently
but are nonetheless connected: a successful Thatcher-era businessman and his
former mistress, a schoolteacher in London's East End. You know where Hare
comes down in the debate between their values. But the play does not exist for
one character's worldview to vanquish the other's. Both are by turns
persuasive, flawed, and poignant.

            The recent offerings on
Broadway show not only Hare's gift for the exposition of issues but also his
limitations. The Blue Room , which I saw in its London production last
fall, was probably the weakest of the bunch. Arthur Schnitzler's original play,
La Ronde , was a scandalous-for-its-time depiction of empty sexual
promiscuity--so scandalous it wasn't meant to be performed. But with the shock
value lost, the play needed something more than Hare's topical amendments
added. His adaptation didn't provide much food for thought, which is unusual
for him. A bit of hackwork, it suggested that he might be spreading himself too
thin.

            V ia Dolorosa , which I also saw in London, is more
stimulating (intellectually), but only a bit. Based on a visit to Israel, it's
journalism by other means of the sort that Anna Deveare Smith has done so
brilliantly. But Hare is no Smith. His performance adds little to his script,
and his script adds little to the subject, arriving mostly at familiar
platitudes about Israel. Nonetheless, one has to admire his guts for trying to
entertain an audience single-handedly with a talk about Middle East politics,
no less. And the work is somewhat interesting despite its inherent limitations.
We see how Hare can turn even a monologue into a kind of dialogue of
perspectives, as he pits the passionate commitment of West Bank settlers
against the humanism of the Israeli culturati. "Are we where we live or what we
think?" he asks at the end of the play. "What matters? Stones or Ideas?"

            
               Amy's View , the best of the recent works
to show up here, is a more familiar and successful exercise. It is a play with
clear imperfections, such as an excessively shrill third act. But one forgives
such flaws because of the way Hare draws his audience into the play's issues.
Here the debate he sets up is a three-way among mother, daughter, and the
daughter's boyfriend. Esme, played by Judi Dench, is an actress who lives for
the theater. Her daughter, one of Hare's ethereal women a little too good for
this world, lives for love. The daughter's boyfriend, Dominic, is a cynic who
lives only for himself.

            Within this conflict of values is a clash about
art. Dominic, a director of exploitative films and television, contends that
the theater is a dead form. Esme stands in for the continued vitality of the
stage. The final act finds her having lost everything--her home, her financial
independence, and her daughter--but performing brilliantly in a new play that
she describes as "sincere." We see her failings redeemed through commitment to
her craft. The same might justly be said of the man who wrote the play.

         
      
   
