
   
   
      
         
            Flesh and Bone

            D.W. Griffith raised
"crosscutting" to an art in his racist 1915 epic The Birth of a Nation ,
in which he jumped back and forth between "renegade Negroes" preparing to
ravish a white maiden and Ku Klux Klanners galloping chivalrously to her aid.
In True Crime , director Clint Eastwood demonstrates at once how far the
medium has come in terms of race and how far it has backslid artistically--to
about 1910. As a white journalist (played by Eastwood) hastens to save an
innocent black man (Isaiah Washington) from execution for the murder of a
pregnant white convenience-store cashier, Eastwood cuts from the reporter's car
careening around hairpin curves to poison-bearing tubes being inserted into the
black man's veins: screeching car, needle in vein, screeching car, poison
descending the tube, screeching car, clock going tick-tick-tick, glazed
expression on the dying man's face, screeech ... Not even Robert Altman,
who parodied this sort of climax in The Player , was cynical enough to
let his sellout filmmaker play the intravenous card.

            Melodramas like True
Crime are all pretty much hustles, but the good ones are stylish enough to
make you love the old song and dance. This one tends toward unlovably brazen
pokes and shoves, yet there are moments (mostly in the script) when a higher
sensibility can be glimpsed through all the galumphing crumminess. The film's
most emblematic character is a beggar who trails people outside the offices of
the Oakland Tribune yelling, "Gimme pussy on toast!" or "Gimme money on
toast!" True 
               Crime gives you sleaze on toast--a heap of tabloid
bathos, a dusting of high-mindedness, a dash of gallows humor. It's a bizarre
concoction, but it's riveting--and I use that term advisedly, in the sense of a
hack-'em-up serial killer riveting somebody's head to the side of a door.

            The film presents Eastwood as Steve Everett, a philandering
ex-alcoholic with (I swear that the movie exhumes this phrase) a "nose for
truth." After a young female reporter whom Everett has plied with drink crashes
her car on something called Dead Man's Curve, the former New York hotshot is
forced to fill in at a "human interest" interview with Frank Beachum
(Washington) a mere eight hours before his scheduled San Quentin demise. That's
the cue for what in movies is called a "conversion narrative," in which a
heretofore lost soul pursues a seemingly lost cause--and, inevitably, finds
redemption.

            The script, credited to Larry Gross, Paul Brickman,
and Stephen Schiff (from a potboiler by Andrew Klavan), is often laughably
schematic, but much of what's outside its ramrod narrative is masterfully
orchestrated: the physical exam on Beachum that begins the film (he's in
perfect health to be killed), the meetings between the warden and his guards on
execution procedure, the testing of the different colored phones--one connected
to the governor's office--outside the lethal injection chamber. The raunchy
patter between Eastwood and James Woods as his editor in chief might have made
for classic scenes if the former had known how to rein in the latter: Woods has
ballooned into such a self-congratulatory grotesque that he now upstages his
own blowhard characters. Two funny, affecting sequences exploit every father's
pained awareness of his daughter's unmet needs. In one, the besieged Everett is
obliged to take his little girl to the zoo, so he stuffs her into a cart and
races past the animals ("Speed Zoo!") while hollering out their names--at once
thrilling the child and endangering her life. In the other, Beachum's daughter,
visiting for the last time, loses a green crayon she needs to draw grass, and
her mounting hysteria conveys her grief at the loss of her daddy more
eloquently than any direct expression ever could. The scene's punch line--the
prison guards comb the parking lot for the crayon--might be the best, most
irrationally moving moment in the movie. Unless that moment is Everett's retort
to Beachum's wife (Lisa Gay Hamilton) who cries out angrily, as if confronting
a wayward savior, "Where were you all this time?" Shrugs the journalist, by way
of expiation, "It wasn't my story."

            That the actor has
condemned so many killers to death with his .44-caliber Magnum gives the
liberal thrust of True Crime a certain piquancy: Only Eastwood can go to
San Quentin. But is he plausibly cast as a journalist? As the taciturn
protagonist of vigilante pictures, Eastwood could be a hoot, and his struggle
to articulate something clearly beyond his range resulted in the one true
multidimensional performance of his career: the aging Secret Service agent of
In The Line of Fire (1993). But this is not a man who strikes me--either
in interviews or on the big screen--as being at home with words. His comic
acting style is based on a gunfighter's paranoia, on letting others speak (and
draw) first; the verbal forwardness of Everett sits uneasily on his 68-year-old
frame. In any case, it has become painful to listen to Eastwood talk. That
voice, which never had much timbre, has grown so raspy that you can practically
see the flakes of his vocal cords swirling around his head like dandruff.

            That's not an appetizing image, but I'm preparing you for
Ravenous , the cannibal saga I predict will elicit the most derisive
reviews of any film this year. I'd like to recommend it, but it's too silly. On
the plus side, it's ravishingly well directed by Antonia Bird ( Priest ,
1995), who reportedly came on board two weeks after shooting had commenced and
as such had little say about the thrust of the script. She could not alter the
coven of frontier cannibals to, say, lapsed Catholic priests, although I bet
that the idea crossed her mind. Even so, the first half of Ravenous is
tantalizingly scary. A captain, Boyd (Guy Pearce of L.A. Confidential ,
1997), is decorated for heroism in the Spanish-American War and then exiled to
an isolated fort high in the Sierra Nevada mountains of California--a seemingly
godforsaken place where, at least in winter, the only passers-by are starving
wagon-trainers. Why exile a hero? It seems that he initially played dead in the
heat of battle, then awoke to find himself lodged under a messy corpse, the
blood from which was running into his mouth. Invigorated à la Popeye the Sailor
Man, he proceeded to capture the enemy regiment single-handedly. Not a man
you'd want to have hovering around your mess hall.

            Bird and her cinematographer, Anthony B. Richmond,
create a world of blinding white peaks and deep black crevices in which demons
might lodge--a world of humans driven batty from fear and isolation, where
reaching out to other people sometimes takes the form of ingesting them. The
metaphor would be better if left suggestive, if the strange new appetites were
somehow the product of anxieties associated with American westward expansionism
and "Manifest Destiny." But the second half of Ravenous is almost
literally a dumb vampire picture, in which the chief vampire woos a reluctant
half-vampire who has pangs of conscience about cooking and eating his fellow
man("Join us! You know you want to!" etc.).

            By all means see Ravenous if your taste runs
to bloody cannibal pictures. (I found it less of a gross-out than, say,
You've Got Mail , which would have benefited from a touch of
flesh-eating.) Although Pearce brings little to the party but his cheekbones,
Jeffrey Jones makes a wonderfully mordant fort commander, and Robert
Carlyle--who pops up out of the wilderness with burning eyes and a tale of
having been forced to cook and eat his horses, dogs, and traveling
companions--might turn out to be a major actor. Carlyle looks like just the
sort of fellow who'd think it his duty to explore things that the rest of us,
deep down, want to know about but wouldn't dream of investigating ourselves.
He's someone you could actually imagine taking aside and asking, "Er, Robert,
tell me ... does it really taste like pork?"

         
      
   
