
   
   
      
         
             Fortune and Men's Eyeballs

            Bill Gross, a Pasadena,
Calif., businessman, has a great moneymaking idea. His firm, Free-PC.com, will
ship you a free 333-megahertz Compaq computer. He'll also give you free
Internet access and a free maintenance contract. In return, all he wants is two
little things. Your soul and a pound of flesh? No, just your eyeballs and a bit
of demographic information. "Eyeballs" is Webspeak for the number of people who
see a Web page--and, presumably, any ad that is on it. If a Web page is served
to 100,000 computers, that counts as 100,000 eyeballs, although literally it's
more like 200,000, assuming two eyeballs per person.

            Gross' company will
place ads on a small portion of the screen as you use your free computer. And
with the information you give him about your income, tastes, and so on, he will
be able to sell you to advertisers whose products and pitches are aimed at your
sort of person. The more an advertiser knows about you, the more it is willing
to pay to reach you. On the Internet, such information is even more useful
because it's easier to fine-tune who sees an ad. The ad you see at the top of
this page may be different from the one your neighbor sees when she visits this
same article. Bill Gross can send each of his free computer owners ads for
precisely what he or she is most likely to buy. In this way Gross hopes to make
back his costs and then some.

            Of course, Gross is not the only one with this idea. The
Web is full of sites that give away valuable stuff free in the hope of making
it back in advertising. 
                  Slate
               , notoriously, for starters. And
this practice is not unknown in other media, either. Television programming is
still mostly free to the user. And even newspapers and traditional magazines
don't begin to cover their costs from what readers pay. Those readers are
heavily subsidized by advertisers hoping to sell them stuff. What's notable
about the Web is the profusion of free offerings that go way beyond mere
editorial content filling in the space between ads. There's an online store
called Onsale atCost selling computer equipment at the true wholesale price.
Onsale atCost may be the only store in the world to hire PricewaterhouseCoopers
to document that it is not going to make a profit. CBS's SportsLine.com
actually pays you to get sports scores from their site. The site counts the
number of times you visit SportsLine, and frequent users are given T-shirts and
sunglasses. Each time you visit you are even entered in $1 million prize
sweepstakes. And AllAdvantage.com promises to pay you up to $20 per month for
downloading an application that displays ads in the corner of your screen.
It'll pay you even more if you can convince your friends to sign up as
well.

            eFax.com will give you a
free fax number and allow you to receive faxes by e-mail--free. Everyone wants
to give you free e-mail. Free personal address books and calendars, free
mapping services, free personalized news and weather--all are available in
exchange for your eyeballs and a bit of information about yourself, either
asked for explicitly or gleaned from what you reveal in using the free
service.

            Which raises the question: How much can your eyeballs
possibly be worth? Suppose I could insidiously find out enough about you to
influence every purchasing decision you make. Suppose I could promise that
every ad I sold you would go straight to your spending reflex. What could I
sell that power for?

            Let's do some math.
Newsweek says Gross pays $600 for the computer. Add $100 a year for the
Internet connection and the service contract and assume the computer has a
usable life of two years. He's paying $400 per year for your attention. How on
earth is he going to make this back? Well, suppose some Chiat/Day ad wizard can
create a series of banner ads, which, by blinking in the corner of your screen,
compel you to go out and buy $400 worth of stuff. It's hard to imagine, but
it's not crazy. But $400 of sales isn't good enough. Hewlett-Packard isn't
going to pay $400 for your eyeballs if you're just going buy one $400
Hewlett-Packard printer. Hewlett-Packard needs $400 in profit , which may
mean 10 or 20 printers . That is, Gross must convince his advertisers
that they'll get $400 of profit per customer, which means, say,
something like $4,000 in sales . Each year. Just from you. And just
because of his ads.

            Now consider that advertisers spend an estimated $100
billion plugging goods and services to America's 100 million households. In
other words, advertisers, as a group, think that affecting the purchasing
decisions of an entire household of average eyeballs is worth $1,000 per year.
That's for all the ads you see in every medium, from television to billboards,
in the course of a year. Bill Gross is betting that his ads alone, aimed at
just one person, will be worth almost half that amount. Maybe he will manage to
find bigger spenders. Or maybe he'll be wildly more successful in affecting
their decisions. Or maybe he's nuts.

            His task will be easier
if his $400 doesn't have to come out of what advertisers are already spending
but by convincing them that it's worth spending more. That's where the
demographic information comes in. This is not a new concept, of course. John
Wanamaker, who built a department store empire in 19 th -century
Philadelphia, once said, "Half the money I spend on advertising is wasted ... I
only wish I knew which half."

            Targeting is a solution to Wanamaker's problem. You can
deliver Lexus ads to affluent customers pulling down more than $100,000 per
year. To less fortunate customers, you can deliver, say, Hyundai ads. To get a
sense of how valuable targeting is to advertisers, the New York
Times-- which makes you give demographic information in order to register
for the site--charges four cents for a banner ad that's shown to everyone and
six cents for one that is targeted. In other words, targeted ads are worth 50
percent more. Yahoo! can tell what your interests are by the search you're
entering. In writing this article, I entered "Lexus" into Yahoo! and, sure
enough, a banner ad for a Lexus popped up above my search results. And when I
entered "New York Times" I got a banner ad for the New York Times . Both
Lexus and the Times pay for this service. On average, these targeted
search engine ads cost 50 percent more than ordinary bulk ads.

            But is the Internet so
miraculous an advertising vehicle that Gross will be able to siphon off $400
per person from total ad spending of $1,000 per family--or persuade advertisers
to spend an additional $400 to reach each of his customers? This isn't so
obvious. After all, targeting is not unique to the Internet. A Lexus ad in
Car and Driver or Fortune is pretty well targeted at affluent
people who like fancy cars. And ads on the Internet, at least so far, lack
oomph. A banner at the top of a Web page just isn't the same as a luxurious
two-page color spread.

            Targeting may increase what advertisers will spend per
eyeball, but it also reduces the number of eyeballs they have to pay for.
Unless Wanamaker was willing to pay double for reaching the right half of the
people, his total ad spending would go down and not up. The apparent going
premium of 50 percent for a targeted ad on the Internet suggests that Internet
advertising may be as likely to reduce total ad spending as to increase it.

            Last year, advertisers spent $2 billion on the
Internet, compared with $35 billion spent on broadcast TV and $10 billion spent
on cable. That's 2 percent of the $100 billion total spent on ads in all media.
The Internet ad market is growing at two or three times the rate of any other
medium. So suppose advertisers direct one-fifth of their resources onto the
Internet. That would be a tenfold increase in the Internet's share. And
suppose the total market for advertising doubled . In this highly
optimistic scenario, Internet ad spending would be $400 per household. In other
words, Bill Gross could break even--provided he was the only advertiser on the
Web.

            Eyeballs are worth money only because they are
attached to wallets. And the size of the wallets is a strict limit on the value
of the eyeballs. So have I just argued myself out of a job by mathematically
disproving the theory on which my paycheck is based? Not at all--or at least I
don't think so. Free magazine articles are one thing, free computers are
another. Exchanging stuff for eyeballs makes sense as long as the cost of
providing the stuff is less than the value of the eyeballs to advertisers. What
it has cost 
                  Slate
                to provide this article by me can be the basis
for a very profitable ad-based business. Take my word for it.

         
      
   
