
   
   
      
         
            No. 217: &quot;TK&quot;

            

               In Belgrade, one group includes the American Center, the British
Council, the Goethe Institute, and the French Cultural Center; the other group
includes the Original Levi's Store and You've Got Mail . What's the
distinction?
            

            by noon
ET Wednesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Monday's Question
(No. 215)--"Here's the Pitch":
            

            

               
                  Fill in the blank. After creating the highest-rated movie ever
made for Showtime, Warren Weideman is about to make four sequels, but the
project was a tough sale. "Most producers' eyes would glaze over as soon as I
said the words, '____________.' "
               
            

            
"Highest-rated movie ever made for Showtime."-- Daniel Radosh ( Bruce
Brown and Bruce Oberg had similar answers.)

            
"Emmanuelle, but with clothes."-- Ananda "Getcher Cheap Astroturf Here"
Gupta
            

            
"Baruch ataw adonay ..."-- Larry Amaros
            

            "Union
crew."--Stephen Frick
            

            "My two
kittens and my new laser pointer."-- Andrew Reynolds
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            What I hadn't realized
when I posted this question was that two different types of responses were
possible--those that mock the idiocy of Warren Weideman for proposing truly
stupid movies, frequently involving an abstruse philosopher, and those that
mock Showtime for making truly stupid movies, frequently involving
Shannon Tweed with her shirt off. These are both worthy goals, and that's what
I admire about News Quiz participants: that the Weideman mockers and the
Showtime mockers can respect each other and work together to mock various
members of the Bush family, the anti-missile system, and maybe some kind of
monkey--that's why the anti-missile system doesn't work, see, because of his
crazy antics, and then Gov. Bush has him executed, and all of America and the
Lockheed board of directors can sleep peacefully! Tonight on Showtime: Shannon
Tweed in Fry His Monkey Ass, Governor Hero . Oh, like you wouldn't
watch.

            
               First-Class
Answer
            

            "Most producers' eyes would glaze over as soon as I
said the words 'post office .' "

            The postal service did not directly finance The
Inspectors , starring Louis Gossett Jr. as a two-fisted postal inspector,
but it did spend millions promoting it--printing 5,000 commemorative envelopes,
hanging movie posters in 40,000 post offices, and putting Gossett's voice on
its phone system so you hear a movie promo when you're on hold.

            The idea for the movie emerged when the postal
service hired Weideman, an ad man who was very big in product placement, to
improve its image.

            While ludicrous on the
face of it, there have been less likely government heroes. Richard Widmark
played a two-fisted health inspector tracking down a pneumonic plague carrier
in the 1950 Panic in the Streets , directed by the odious but talented
Elia Kazan; it won an Oscar for best story. And I believe Gene Hackman once
played an FBI agent who supported the civil rights movement and battled robot
dogs on Neptune.

            
               Silver Lining
Extra
            

            Yesterday in New Mexico, for the sixth time in six
tests, an anti-missile missile missed its target. But that's really a good
thing, according to both the Pentagon and Lockheed Martin, which built the
system.

            

               "It was a very close miss."-- Jennifer Caniff, Pentagon
spokeswoman
               

               "We came very close to hitting this target ... and we're very encouraged by
that."-- Thomas Corcoran, president and CEO of Lockheed Martin
               

               "Much of the operation was as it should be."-- Thomas Corcoran
               

               "Our technicians were courteous and neatly dressed."-- Thomas Corcoran,
or perhaps that was me
               

               "And lunch. That went well, especially those spicy shrimp, mmm
mmm."-- Thomas Corcoran, or was that me too?
               

               "Oh, right, so you're so perfect, Mr. Perfect,
Mr. Goddamned Big Nose Perfect Sissy Boy Stupid!"-- Thomas Corcoran; oops, me
again
               

            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Some Unlikely Old Bore in Love.

         
      
   
