
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Typos and
IPOs
            

            Snobs that we are, we like to pretend that we don't
think much about Salon , the only roughly comparable magazine on the Web.
But the truth is that it does cross our radar screens from time to time. Do we
regard Salon as our competition? Yes and no. We are somewhat direct
competitors for advertising dollars, but for readership the question is more
complicated. The real competition for any publication in any medium is the
clock: There are only 24 hours in a day. Strangely, the least competitive rival
claimant for those hours is likely to be a similar publication. Print
magazines, which depend on direct mail for generating subscriptions, usually
find that their best prospects are subscribers to magazines they most closely
resemble. Harper's does best with the mailing list of the Atlantic
Monthly , and so on. This isn't because people are persuaded to switch, but
because someone who has already eaten a blueberry bagel is more likely to eat a
strawberry bagel than the average person is to eat a fruit bagel of any
sort.

            In a fledgling medium,
similar publications are even more interdependent since the viability of this
sort of enterprise is unproved. The cold, hard fact is that we need
Salon to prosper and vice versa. The warm, throbbing fact, however, is
that we are only human. And rumor has it that they are as well. Human emotions
like Schadenfreude --and there must be a German word for reverse
Schadenfreude : distress at other people's happiness--inevitably
complicate rational business judgment.

            Despite our best efforts, we couldn't help noticing lately
that Salon has announced an IPO. That stands for international poetry
Oktoberfest. Just the thing for a political-cultural magazine. No, actually,
IPO stands for initial public offering. That is, they're selling stock, a more
unusual enterprise for a political-cultural magazine. Two and a half million
shares will be offered at about $12 a share. That will raise $30 million, if
they pull it off (minus a few million for the midwives). And this is for less
than a quarter of the company. At $12 a share, the value of the whole
enterprise would be almost $130 million. The editor in chief's shares would be
worth more than $6 million.

            That $130 million would be an astonishing figure
for a political-cultural magazine even if it made money. It's about what the
queen of the genre, The New Yorker , went for in 1985, when it was still
profitable. But Salon is losing money at a rate of $6 million a year and
admits that this figure will probably increase. ( Salon also claims to be
much, much more than a political-cultural magazine, and we intend no insult by
describing it as such.) Martin Peretz, the owner of the New Republic ,
has joked for two decades that he'll only sell TNR for "20 times
losses." The owners of Salon are asking even more, and it's no joke. Or
at least, it's not only a joke.

            (Marty Peretz,
meanwhile, is seeing his own joke come almost precisely true as co-owner of
TheStreet.com, which is losing $16 million a year and is going public at a
price that would value the whole company at $300 million.)

            And what do we at 
                  Slate
                think about this? If
we had any sense, we'd be delighted. After all, if Salon is worth $130
million, 
                  Slate
                must be worth ... well, a lot. Maybe more, maybe
less, but same ballpark. As a division of a big company, we can't go public
ourselves. But a successful Salon IPO certainly will help when it's time
to ask Dad for our allowance. Also, our goal is to become profitable. If the
Salon IPO works, "the market"--America's answer to the Oracle at
Delphi--will have declared its judgment that this sort of thing can become a
real, profit-making business.

            Trouble is,

                  Slate
                has been ridiculing the Internet bubble all along. (See
almost any random item for the past six months, or Bruce Gottlieb's recent
piece on ".") How can we convince ourselves that this one particular IPO is a
rational reflection of actual economic potential if all the rest are a
reflection of something closer to clinical insanity? The truth is that we
can't. The deeper human truth is that we don't especially want to. The good
fortune of other people is annoying enough (however good your own fortune may
be). At least let us cling to the belief that it is unjustified.

            Now that we've made our general attitude toward
Salon and its IPO perfectly unclear, let us take a look at that IPO
prospectus. We were alarmed to discover that it is riddled with typographical
errors! Typos are an athema to any high-qualidy publcation. Careless
proofreading is a shure sign of inner wroght. Although we certainly do not wish
to discourage anyone from investing in Salon , we feel an obligation to
inform our readers about these troublesome lapses. They are especially shocking
in a formal government filing, vetted by lawyers, in which inaccuracy can
result in disastrous lawsuits. And yet:

            

               The prospectus reports revenues of $2,058,000 in
the nine months ending Dec. 31, 1998. (And $300,000 of that in advertising
barter--an ad for an ad--leaving cash revenues of about $1.7 million.) This
cannot be right. It is clearly far too low, since David Talbot, Salon 's
"chairman of the board, editor-in-chief and director," told Newsweek
last September that revenues "this year" were $6 million. It might be
mathematically possible that Salon had $4 million in revenue during the
first three months of 1998 and $2 million in the last nine months, thus $6
million for the year--except that the prospectus also reports revenues of $1.1
million for all 12 months ending March 31, 1998. It is unthinkable, of course,
that Talbot--a journalist, as well as commander, grand high executioner, and
maximum leader--would have lied to Newsweek . Especially when
Salon "executives" gave the same $6 million figure to the Los Angeles
Times in June. So, clearly the $2 million figure is a typo.

               Talbot also told Newsweek that "profits
won't come until 1999." This was barely three months before 1999 began. So, the
prospectus is surely mistaken in saying that Salon lost $4.3 million
from April through December of 1998, and "We expect these operating losses to
increase for at least the foreseeable future." Of course, "profits won't come
until 1999" doesn't necessarily mean that profits will come in 1999. It depends
on what you mean by "until." But Salon told a trade publication called
Link-Up in November 1998--just two months before the dawn of bliss--that
"Salon is slated [ sic ] to turn a profit in 1999." It's a
disgrace. How could Salon be so sloppy as to report large and growing
losses in its prospectus when it actually is already profitable?

               The prospectus states: "Our revenues depend on a
limited number of advertisers and sponsors who are not subject to long-term
agreements." And, "We anticipate that our financial results ... will continue
to significantly depend on revenues from a small number" of advertisers. The
problem here is probably the classic misplaced "not." They mean to say: Our
advertisers are subject to long-term agreements, and our financial
results will not depend, etc. After all, the January/February
Columbia Journalism Review cites Talbot as saying that Salon has
"more than 120 advertisers, half long-term." Or maybe CJR is the sloppy
one here. Did it omit Talbot's explanation that all those long-term advertisers
will contribute insignificant revenues?

               Here's a real puzzler. Back in 1997, Salon
told PC Week that it "gets $60 per 1,000 page views, compared with $20
to $30 for Yahoo" from advertisers because its readership is so classy. And yet
Salon 's 1999 prospectus refers to "Salon 's average CPM [cost
per-thousand] of $23"! Has Salon 's advertising CPM actually sunk by
two-thirds? More likely that $23 is supposed to be an $83 or a $123.

               On a subject of particular interest to

                     Slate
                  , the prospectus says this about Salon 's paid
membership program: "As of March 1999, there were approximately 1,050 members
enrolled in the Salon Members program." One or two zeros probably were dropped
here, as 1,000 members at $25 each would be merely $25,000, and yet Talbot told
Columbia Journalism Review in January that revenues from the program
were "above what our projections were." Were they projecting fewer than a
thousand members? Unlikely. So the truth must be that they have 10,500 or even
105,000 members, since it goes without saying that Talbot could not have been
trying to mislead the Columbia Journalism Review .

            

            Let us, though, just for the heck of it, consider the
possibility that perhaps the prospectus is accurate and all these quotations
and citations from Talbot and others at Salon are in error. Is such a
thing possible? Although highly unlikely, it's possible, we suppose, that all
these distinguished publications repeatedly misheard the same individual in the
same way, although he has no speech impediment that we know of. Surely, though,
it is impossible to imagine that the Salon folks themselves have been
lying, spinning, and covering up. Journalists, after all, expose these
practices--we do not commit them.

            David Talbot has had
inspiring things to say about journalists and the truth. In particular, he has
spoken of Salon 's dedication to a mission of exposing important facts.
And he has made pointed comparisons to other Webzines that are allegedly
content to sit on their fannies and analyze or summarize. Last fall
Salon published the important fact that Henry Hyde had an adulterous
affair 30 years ago. Many could not see the importance of this fact, but
Salon said it revealed President Clinton's chief congressional accuser
as a hypocrite. Those who go around exposing unpleasant facts about other
people had better be truth-tellers themselves. Buckling his swash on CNN,
Talbot declared: "Fearless journalists, true journalists shouldn't be worried
about perception or spin. They should be worried about the truth and concerned
about the truth, and that was Salon 's guiding principle here."

            Let's not be sentimental. Let's consider this as a pure
business matter. Here is a chairman of the board, editor in chief, and director
who is marketing his company as what might be called a "truth play." Truth is
his company's Unique Selling Proposition, its market niche, its core
competency, its brand value. It would be sheer folly for such a company to
invent preposterous lies and spins and feed them to the nation's most prominent
publications. That's why the only logical explanation is typographical errors
in the prospectus.

            Thank goodness we don't hav these poblems at

                  Slat
               .

         
      
   
