
   
   
      
         
            Iran Comes in From the Cold

            The visit to Italy this
week of President Mohammad Khatami of Iran, the first by an Iranian leader to
western Europe since the Islamic revolution of 1979, was a major international
story Wednesday across Europe and the Middle East. In the Saudi daily Asharq
al-Awsat , Amir Taheri, a prominent Iranian newspaper editor under the shah,
now living in exile, urged the West to give cautious support to the reforming
president, while pressing for further changes in Iran's policies. Khatami, he
wrote, is the first Iranian president to have been "elected through a more or
less acceptable process" and a leader who has ended Iran's acts of terrorism in
Europe and its "active campaign against the Middle East peace process." He has
also established an indirect dialogue with Israel and invited French and
British Jewish leaders to visit Tehran.

            In Germany, Die Welt and the Süddeutsche Zeitung of
Munich both saw the visit as a demonstration of the extraordinary progress that
has been made in Iran's relations with the West since Khatami came to power two
years ago. In an op-ed article Wednesday, the Financial Times of London said Khatami's objectives in
Italy were threefold--to win Western endorsement for his reforming efforts, to
foster international acceptance of Iran as a regional power with legitimate
security interests, and to entice urgently needed foreign investment. The
FT claimed that the recent municipal elections backing his reform
program were "the first local elections in over 2,500 years of Persian
history." But Khatami's charm offensive is being impeded by Iran's apparent
attempts to develop nuclear weapons, fueling the drive for more sanctions by
the U.S. Congress. "The nuclear issue and US sanctions on Iran greatly
complicate the Khatami government's efforts to reform the economy," the
newspaper said.

            In Italy, La Stampa dwelt on the
coincidence of Salman Rushdie's arrival in the country, on the same day as
Khatami, to receive an honorary degree from the University of Turin. The Turin
newspaper said that while Rushdie, the object of a fatwa issued 10 years ago by
the Ayatollah Khomeini, still can't be free of the nightmare that some Muslim
fanatic might try to kill him, "it is certain that Iran, whatever it does,
cannot get free of Rushdie."

            The "banana war" between the United States and Europe was
cited in the Pan-Arab al-Quds al-Arabi as a reason for Arabs not to trust the
United States. In its main editorial Monday, the paper said the British had
particular cause for dismay over the United States' "punishing tariffs" on
their products, because they have given "unquestioning and unhesitating support
for all U.S. policies and actions--even to the extent of exposing their own
citizens and interests to danger, and calling into question their true
commitment to Europe." The paper said, "The British are learning that the
'special relationship' they have spent the last 20 years nurturing with the
United States is worthless when economic interests collide. ... This behooves
us to ask: If the United States treats her most trusted ally, Britain, in such
an ungrateful manner, is she going to treat those Arabs who think they can
befriend her any better?"

            In Paris, Le Monde devoted a full page
Wednesday to the banana war, predicting fiercer trade battles to come on
hormone-treated beef and genetically modified foods, and on the European A3XX
Airbus, which is due to be launched next November in direct competition with
the Boeing 747. Le Monde said the United States was isolated on bananas
and had managed to unite the whole of Europe against it by "maladroitly"
including Scottish cashmere among the European products it has chosen to
penalize.

            But the main story in French papers Wednesday was the
acquittals of former Prime Minister Laurent Fabius and one of his Cabinet
colleagues on charges of criminal negligence and manslaughter in the deaths of
hundreds of people who contracted AIDS in the 1980s from transfusions of
contaminated blood. The Paris evening paper France-Soir reflected
widespread outrage at the verdict with a front-page headline saying the dead
had been "mocked." Referring to the late President François Mitterrand's
establishment of a special court to try Fabius et al., the paper said that "no
ordinary accused have ever been treated with such consideration in the annals
of French justice." Special justice means that the strong always triumph, it
added, and to this there was only one solution: "The same court for everyone,
which would be a revolution in our judicial customs."

            In India, the
Hindu of
Madras carried an editorial Wednesday about the rapid growth of crime in
cyberspace. It said that India needed both changes in the law and advanced
technological training for police operatives in order to combat the "nefarious
activity of a well-educated and highly accomplished tribe which is making its
debut in cyberspace." The police, it added, must be kept "in pace with the
galloping pace of high-tech in brilliantly planned and executed operations
which could transform electronic gadgetry into burglar's tools when the
20 th century is in its last gasp."

             

         
      
   
