
   
   
      
         
            The Plane Truth

            The Los Angeles
Times leads with late developments in the Indian Airlines hostage
crisis in Afghanistan. India sent an official to meet with the hijackers, an
indication that they were looking for ways to end the crisis. The Washington Post and
the New York Times
lead with the speedy trial, conviction, and sentencing of four leaders of the
Falun Gong spiritual movement, banned by the Chinese government July 22 as "a
cancer on the society." The USA Today lead documents increased gun sales toward the
year's end. The Wall Street
Journal tops its "World-Wide" column with Russia's most aggressive
attempt yet to seize Grozny, a story the USAT 's off-leads.

            Hijackers set a 12:40 p.m. deadline (12:10 a.m. PT) for India to respond to
demands, namely the release of a Kashmiri separatist and religious leader
imprisoned there since 1994, the LAT reports. The WP and
NYT report that finger-pointing among the international players has
begun before the crisis's resolution. Pakistan and India have accused each
other of orchestrating the whole thing; Afghanistan's Taliban militia, which
India does not recognize, wants the plane out of its country and U.N. mediation
in. But India did not want U.N. help. Eventually, the hijackers agreed to leave
Afghanistan today, according to the LAT. A U.N. official checked up on
passengers during the day yesterday and persuaded the hijackers to release a
diabetic man. Taliban officials have delivered food to the passengers, but
conditions are worsening. The WP reports that there were still 161
passengers on board. The NYT counts 155 and the LAT goes with a
conservative "more than 150."

            The nature of the Falun Gong trial--that is, artifice--betrays the
government's intolerance for members of its ruling party who belong to the
organization: All four accused were in the Communist Party, the Post
reports. The prison sentences range from 18 years for Li Chang, a police
ministry official who helped organize the group's 10,000-person silent
demonstration in April, to seven years for Yao Jie, the sole woman in the
group, who was charged as an accomplice. The four were officially accused of
using the organization to undermine law, contributing to the deaths of some
1,400 people who were taught to avoid modern medicine, and obtaining and
dispersing information about the state's crackdown on the group.

            Y2K fears have contributed to an increase in gun sales, a trend that gun
industry marketing has to some extent encouraged, USAT reports. Wilson
Combat sells a Millennium Protector .45 Automatic for self-defense, against
whom or what it is unclear. Authorities conducted about a million background
checks this month, up 14.7 percent from last year.

            A 95 mph wind yesterday swept through the Champs-Élysées, the rest of
northern France, and parts of Switzerland and Germany, according to a
NYT front-pager. As many as 62 people are believed dead in the rare
hurricane-strength storm.

            An article in Sunday's LAT does more than lambaste U.S. politicians
for using 6-year-old Elian Gonzalez to advance their own interests. The writer
traces Fidel Castro's behavior through a sordid four-and-a-half year
international tug-of-war for his own son. In 1954, Castro's wife left him for
the U.S., taking along their 5-year-old. Castro requested that his son visit
him in Mexico a year later and promised, "as a gentleman," to return him in two
weeks. Instead, Castro put Fidelito in the charge of his inner circle. The boy
would be abducted again two weeks later and returned to his mother. When Castro
rose to power in 1959, he took back his son, now 50 and living in Havana.
Castro's reasons for demanding Fidelito's return resemble those currently
claimed by Gonzalez's family. The lesson: "The shattered family is the emblem
of Cuba." The revolution has ripped thousands of Cuban families apart, not the
least of which is Castro's own.

            By contrast, the WSJ reports in today's "Marketplace" section that
Americans can't get enough of Cuba. Unauthorized trips have jumped about 20
percent a year in recent memory. "Loopholes in the travel ban wide enough to
sail a cruise ship through," not to mention the attraction of taboo, encourage
Americans to explore any of a catalog of ways to get to Cuba: enlist as an
educator or researcher, sail in from Key West, or fly in from Canada or Mexico.
The U.S. government has fined fewer than 100 people for going to Cuba since the
travel embargo kicked in 36 years ago.

            A NYT "Business" section piece looks at the evolution of Internet
news sites, which now "include speedy, professional crafting of original
material, multimedia options, clean packaging and lots of self-promotion." How
does the article's own Web version compare with this description? There's no
multimedia option, and the self-promotion simply falls like a brick at the end,
but best of all--no inky fingers.

         
      
   
