
   
   
      
         
            Off the Wal-Mart

            
               USA
Today leads with Al Gore's charge in an interview with the paper
that as president Bill Bradley would endanger the economic expansion and risk
"blundering into another recession" because he would take the entire projected
surplus over the next 10 years and "just blow it" on health-care reform. The
paper has a Bradley spokeswoman saying Gore's charge makes it obvious he lacks
confidence in his own agenda. The Washington Post also fronts campaign jousting by the two
but goes instead with a momentous Labor Department decision: Companies that
allow employees to work at home will be held responsible for federal health and
safety violations that occur at the home work site. The stance, explains the
Post , would mean that even if the employee just occasionally takes work
home with him to attend to a sick child, employers are still required to make
sure that he/she has ergonomically correct furniture and proper lighting and
ventilation in the home office. The Los Angeles
Times fronts the Post story, adding in details about California
companies, but leads with the onset in West Virginia of the U.S.-moderated
Israel-Syria talks, which is also the New York Times lead and which is
fronted elsewhere. The same picture of President Clinton, Israeli Prime
Minister Ehud Barak, and Syrian Foreign Minister Farouk Shara walking together
grace all the fronts that carry photos.

            Both Times report that the meetings hit a snag quickly when an
anticipated face-to-face between Barak and Shara didn't come off. Both also
report that Clinton will not attend every session but will be available to
return whenever circumstances warrant. So serious are the Israelis about
breaking with their past tendencies to leak at such talks, say the papers, that
they've promised to eschew cell phone calls.

            The LAT and WP fronts and the others report inside that acting
Russian President Vladimir Putin has fired Boris Yeltsin's daughter from her
senior Kremlin adviser's post. The LAT and WP treat the move as
only cosmetic, with the daughter and her tight little circle of Kremlin
advisers known as the "Family" retaining the power over Putin widely thought to
have brought him into his present circumstance. Indeed, the LAT and
NYT s quote Mikhail Gorbachev from an interview in an Italian paper
saying that Yeltsin did not want to resign but was pushed out by a trio of this
inner circle including his daughter.

            The USAT "Money" front reports an apparent consequence of not much
bang for the TV advertising bucks spent by dot-coms over the Christmas holiday:
Dot-com advertisers are starting to bail out of Super Bowl ad placements. Into
the breach, says the paper, may step Microsoft, which has never advertised
during the big game.

            The WP runs a story inside about how Italy is thrilled that it came through Y2K unscathed even
though it was probably one of the last developed countries to take the problem
seriously. But the story doesn't prove that doing nothing was the way to go;
actually, it explains that Italy took quite a few precautions, but almost all
at the very last minute. So further reporting on Italy's Y2K experience is not
likely to show that preparedness was a waste but rather perhaps that the
optimal strategy included a healthy dose of procrastination.

            An AP dispatch in the WP and the LAT 's lead editorial
defending the Y2K preparedness effort both mention a great feel-good solution
for anybody who went a touch too wacknoid with the tuna and Spam inventories:
Give it to places that feed the poor. Today's Papers doesn't ask much from its
readers, but is asking now: Please do this.

            With the economy at full throttle, it would be easy to forget that not
everybody has been able to make the trip. Thank goodness the Wall Street
Journal helps remember the neediest. Today's Journal front recounts
the sad saga of a onetime $400,000-a-year NBC vice president, who risked it
all--his five bedroom house in Greenwich, his kids' private schools, his trips
to London--to join an Internet startup. But he found himself under a more
demanding boss than he was used to and got fired before he got a chance to
exercise any stock options. To economize, he had to cancel his family's annual
vacation and his son's guitar lessons. He's now working for an internet outfit
for $175,000 a year plus stock options.

            The LAT business front reports that when Wal-Mart re-launched its Web
site over the weekend, it found it had inadvertently featured something
new--sex books. As a result of downloading a database of titles from a
third-party supplier, America's biggest retailer was suddenly able to offer
The Best of Gay Adult Videos (got 'em) and the Couple's Guide to
the Best Erotic Videos (need 'em).

         
      
   
