
   
   
      
         
            Y2K Computer Shrug

            The New York Times
leads with new Russian President Vladimir Putin's visit to troops fighting
in Chechnya, a story run above the fold in the Los Angeles Times and on Page
A17 in the Washington Post . The Post and LAT lead with
pieces on Y2K computer glitches--or rather the lack thereof--a story fronted by
the NYT (technically, the Post story is part of a Y2K package
serving as the top non-local lead).

            While the LAT labels Vladimir Putin's visit to Chechnya a presidential
"campaign-style tour" and the NYT calls it "unexpected," the Post relates that the new president had planned the trip months
ago, long before Boris Yeltsin decided to step down (this important detail
probably pushed the story off the Post 's front page). As proof of this
prior scheduling, the Post notes that the engravings on the souvenir
hunting knives given by Putin to soldiers near Grozny bore the title "prime
minister" but not "president." With not much else to report about the
presidential visit, the three stories wander in different directions: The
NYT gives behind-the-scenes details of Yeltsin's resignation
announcement and analyzes the legality of his immunity deal; the LAT
speculates on the March 23 presidential election; and the Post reports
on the status of the Grozny siege. A think-tank expert tells the LAT
that Russia's casualty rate exceeds that of both its 1994-'96 Chechen campaign
and the Soviet Union's ill-fated war in Afghanistan.

            The headline of the Post 's piece on the Y2K computer glitch asks, "How Did It All Go
Right?" The answer: Good preparation in the developed world and a low reliance
on technology in the developing world. The LAT ("U.S., Firms, Overreacted to Y2K Fix, Critics Say") and
NYT ("Vast Efforts to Fix Computers Defended [and It's
Not Over]") take a more provocative angle--that the U.S. spent too much to fix
the problem. But the two papers can dig up only three sources between them--two
corporate PR men and an anonymous Internet newsgroup participant--willing to
argue this. However, the LAT does lay out some plausible reasons why
America may have overprepared: fear of litigation and the bureaucratic
imperative to simply upgrade software rather than fix it. The only major
computer foul-up in the U.S., the papers report, was the temporary malfunction
of a Pentagon spy satellite.

            The Post abandons Y2K sobriety by devoting much of its Sunday
"Style" section to the lighter side of millennial madness. There is an
amusing dispatch from Las Vegas and a report on several memorable midnight kisses. Miss Manners announces, with tongue in cheek, that she will
begin to employ the phrase, "Oh, that's soooo 20th century." A computer
consultant says of the anti-climactic changeover, "It's like coitus
interruptus. You know: Is that all there is?" Another Post article
begins, "We realize that you are almost certainly reading
this article by candlelight ... and we regret that our experiments with
glow-in-the-dark ink have failed." The NYT and LAT both pan the millennial celebration in Los Angeles,
blaming the city's lack of a geographic center, of signature iconography, and
of community spirit. (To read 
                  Slate
               's dispatch from
Times Square by policeman Lucas Miller, click here.)

            The NYT and LAT run fascinating accounts of last week's hijacking of an
Indian Airlines jet, as told by several of the passengers. (The terrorists, who
identified themselves as Muslims fighting for Pakistani control of Kashmir,
escaped on Dec. 31 after negotiating a deal with Indian authorities; to read

                  Slate
               's briefing on the Kashmir conflict, click
here.) The
first few days saw repeated emergency landings--one in Pakistan was made
without runway lights and with only a minute and a half of fuel left. Although
the hijackers slit the throat of one passenger in private, they did not
disclose this murder to the other passengers, who at times joked and conversed
with their captors. Near the end of the eight-day odyssey the toilets were
overflowing, and on the seventh day the gunmen announced that in 30 minutes
every passenger would be shot. One hijacker, who called himself "Burger,"
recited Urdu poetry, gave a passenger a birthday gift, and before escaping
ordered all passengers to say they had forgiven him.

            A NYT "Week in Review" article details the apparent failure of "boot-camp" rehabilitation for
juvenile delinquents. Launched in the early '90s with much fanfare, these
paramilitary prisons for youths had expanded to 27 states by 1997. But inmates
are routinely beaten and suffer recidivism rates higher than those of juveniles
in adult prisons. Colorado, Arizona, and North Dakota have dropped their
programs, and Maryland will likely follow.

            An article in the NYT describes the surrender in Pakistan last week of a man whom
authorities believe has murdered 100 boys there in the past six months.
Question: Why does the Times repeatedly call the man a "mass murderer"
when he has yet to be tried? Are accusations against a defendant qualified with
words like "allegedly" only when the crime is prosecuted in the United
States?

            In his inaugural NYT column, Paul Krugman--recently
poached from that renowned repository of writing talent,

                  Slate
               --notes that the much-heralded global economy of
the late 20th (and now 21st) century is really the second of its kind. The
First Global Economy, as he dubs it, occurred in the late 19th century, when
companies started laying telegraph cables beneath the ocean, blasting railroad
tunnels through mountains, and linking the seas with canals. A combination of
jingoism among political elites and insularity among the business elites who
spearheaded this new international commerce provoked a near-50-year reaction
against free trade and global communications. "The big economic question for
the next century," Krugman concludes,

            

               is really political: Can the Second Global Economy build a constituency that
reaches beyond the sort of people who congregate at Davos? If not, it will
eventually go the way of the first.

            

            (To read Krugman's defense of the World Trade Organization in

                  Slate
               , click here.)

            Dueling NYT headlines (from the Internet edition):

            "A Trying Time For Many Net Retailers"

            "A Very Big E-Commerce Christmas"


This Just In--Nuclear War Averted
            

            A lede from Saturday's NYT :

            

               COLORADO SPRINGS, Dec. 31--The new decade arrived well before dawn here
today at Peterson Air Force Base, but there was more relief than celebration as
the world's 24 time zones began passing from the 20th century without nuclear
conflagration.

            

         
      
   
