
   
   
      
         
            Is That All There Is?
            

            Dear Harry,

            I feel a strange mix of emotions in this new millennium. Like a lot of
people, I suspect, I have a guilty secret: I wish something bad had happened.
Not the Rapture. Not even a Deadly Act of Terrorism. But a little glitch would
have been nice--kind of like a snow day when you were a kid (I'm assuming you
haven't been in L.A. your whole life)--something to put a little dent in the
manic optimism of the moment. A few hours without the power, or having the ATM
jam would have been a useful cautionary note at a time when everyone feels like
they deserve an IPO of their own.

            I see from the papers that the Y2K consultants are already extremely
defensive, insisting that the problem wasn't hyped and that their $100 billion
price tag was worth it. I have my doubts. On New Year's Day, my wife raised a
question that's already become cliché 48 hours later: If Y2K wasn't a problem
in countries that spent a lot (e.g. us) and in those that spent little but
still have a lot of computers (Italy, I gather), then didn't we get ripped off?
I still haven't heard a good answer

            For all my wishing for a mini-disaster, I also felt much more moved by the
celebration than I thought I would. Watching the rolling party across the globe
on ABC and CNN was strangely riveting--not least of all because Peter Jennings
felt compelled to pull a Jerry Lewis telethon and anchor the whole thing
himself. By the end he was babbling so much, I expected him to point to the
tote board and ask Ed McMahon how much we'd raised. Still, the effect of seeing
the Y2K date roll across the globe brought out the Kumbaya spirit in me. I feel
the same way sometimes--I'm not kidding--watching the Weather Channel seeing a
storm form over the West Coast of Africa and then roll east into a hurricaine.
The same cloud pattern some Malawi tribesman gazed at eventually dumped water
on a shriner at a casino in Biloxi, Miss. We are the world.

            You think Clinton had a good time, or what? Standing at the Lincoln
Memorial, reading Lincoln's words, with an audience of about a gazillion and a
Steven Spielberg production behind him? Raised in a liberal home, it infuriated
me as a kid that Nixon got to leave his signature on the Apollo 11 plaque left
on the moon. It was Kennedy and Johnson that got us there, and here was Mr.
House Un-American Activities getting to leave his name on the moon after just
six months in office. I imagine there are gazillions of conservatives for whom
it's incredibly painful that Monica's boyfriend got to be the one to usher in
the Third Millennium. Did you see the Larry King column in USA Today ? He
says that Clinton told him he owns the original Harry Truman letter to the
music critic, the one where he threatens to punch out the guy for criticizing
his daughter's piano recital. Steve Forbes gave Clinton the letter, according
to King. Weird ...

            I see in the papers today that Clinton's proposing a modest but still
sizable tax cut for next year. Can there be any doubt how this Kabuki ritual
will play out yet again? The Repubs will push for bigger cuts. Clinton and the
Dems will accuse them of endangering Medicare and Social Security. The public
will back the Dems. The Republicans will bluster, losing popular support, but
then they'll finally cave to Clinton and infuriate their base. They're like
Wile E. Coyote going off the cliff every time.

            Speaking of Republicans, I'm emceeing that Congressional Dinner that you
hosted last year--1,200 Washington bigshots in a hotel ball room, done up in
black tie. You're a comedy God. (Is Spinal Tap on DVD yet?) I do
occasional stand up: Got any tips? I've got 30 days to come up with a bevy of
Denny Hastert jokes and I'm getting edgy. As millennial anxiety goes, it's
pretty small stuff, but I could still use a few tips.

            Talk to you later.
--Matt

         
      
   
