
   
   
      
         
            The Jenny Craig World Tour
            

            Morning, Harry

            D'you catch Monica Lewinsky on Larry King last night? I've had this
reaction before, but I couldn't help but have it again: What was Clinton
thinking? Of all the sex options open to a president, this was a helluva
pick. This, I realize, is not exactly a stunning insight, but since the Jenny
Craig World Tour has begun, I couldn't help feeling it. I also couldn't help
but feel pity for the gal. She's got a bazillion dollars in legal bills thanks
to the Scarlet Letter Special Counsel, and she has to do this humiliating
weight gig with Jenny Craig in order to pay off the bills. (I believed her when
she said that this was the most tasteful of the offers she got.) By the way, my
favorite line from the scandal, which I think reduces the whole thing to one
sentence, is the line from Clinton in which he said to Monica--I'm not making
this up--"You can always say you were bringing me pizza."

            I see the administration is getting ready to let Elian Gonzalez, the cuban
boy/political football, go back to his native land. The Washington Post
reports that they're going to cut a deal in which the father comes here and
picks the kid up. I fear this whole thing will get even more bizarre. Won't
anti-Castro groups in South Florida try to hide the kid? Then we'll have months
of MSNBC on "Where's Elian?" I don't have particularly strong feelings about
where he belongs. Did the father have any real role in the kid's life? What
kind of home is he in now? (I've got doubts about any home that invites camera
crews and congressmen in to meet with the boy.)

            The Gore-Bradley race, I see, is heating up with each tossing out charges
that the other one is a mere tinkerer and not bold enough. Neither guy is
exactly a poster child for radical change, it seems to me. It's only January
and I'm already tired of Bradley's pedantic tone and Gore's
you-voted-for-vouchers-20-years-ago tone.

            Anything interesting in the Los Angeles Times this morning?

         
      
   
