
   
   
      
         
            The Great Y2K Heist
            

            First things first: What's a "snow day"? Yes, I did spend all my life in
Southern California, except for two nauseating years in New York. Speaking of
which, my television viewing (aided by a big satellite dish that allows me to
see stuff without hearing all the babble American TV throws on top to "explain"
what you're seeing) convinced me that Sydney's celebration beat the Big Apple's
by a country mile. I still don't understand all those dancers in diaphanous
approximations of no national costume that cavorted through Times Square all
day. In the good old, pre-Giuliani days, they would have been mugged and left
for carrion before noon.

            The Los Angeles Times ran a long takeout regarding the putative Y2K
gyp. One "information analyst" was quoted as saying American industry had been
had. This leads me to one conclusion: The vast, exciting run-up in the stock
market, yanked along by the (here's a journalistic cliché ripe for the
executing) "tech-heavy Nasdaq," may not have been irrational exuberance at all;
it may just have been investors' reaction to the tech industry's
hundred-billion-dollar holdup of the rest of the country to "fix the bug."

            Speaking of the Los Angeles Times , said paper, still smarting from
the Staples Center scandal, in which it published a special issue of its Sunday
magazine on the opening of the new arena and split the magazine's profits with
the arena, published a special section Saturday morning in which it printed in
eight-point type the names of all the "members" of its "Millennium registry."
These were people who paid good money to get special commemorative editions of
Friday's and Saturday's papers, and to get their names printed in that special
section. The paper, chastened by David Shaw's long exposé of the Staples
scandal, claims to have learned its lesson, but that kind of learniing is
supposed to keep you from getting promoted to the next grade. Also, at the
bottom of the front page of the special section: "We regret any typographical
errors." So don't ask for your money back if they misprinted your name.

            The Staples people paid $7 million, incidentally, for "naming rights" to the
new arena. You'd think the Times could get them to pay at least a
million to get their name off the paper's scandal.

            Harry Shearer

         
      
   
