
   
   
      
         
            Presidency: Easy to Putin

            
               USA
Today and the Washington Post lead with Sunday's word from White House
officials that President Clinton will, in presenting his final budget plan to
Congress next month, ask for tax cuts and credits worth billions. But both
stories are quickly forced into speculation mode because the White House didn't
give out any crunchable details. The top non-local story at the Los Angeles
Times states that the election chances of acting Russian President
Vladimir Putin are excellent in part because of a bill Boris Yeltsin signed on
his last day in office that requires candidates to garner the signatures of 1
million registered voters, an accomplishment the paper says will be much easier
for Putin--now in control of considerable resources as the head of state--than
for any potential rival. The New York Times stuffs taxes and runs
a story inside that also suggests Putin's election inevitability but never
mentions the million-vote requirement; the paper leads instead with a story
that only the LAT also fronts--the Syria/Israel talks scheduled this
week for West Virginia.

            The LAT fronts a story suggesting that Y2K preparedness could prove
to be a huge boon to the economy. The idea put forth is that under the rubric
of Y2K, many companies replaced computer systems wholesale and in the process
they gained not just freedom from the millennial bug but also the ability to
perform a wide array of new tasks. And the productivity thus gained will pay
off for years. Or so the story says, quoting five experts in support along the
way, before swerving abruptly to a "to be sure" 11th paragraph that says Y2K
preparedness "posed an enormous distraction, soaking up time and money that
might have been plowed into projects with a more immediate payoff," and that
"much of the investment went to inoculate older technology against the computer
bug rather than to embrace the newest processes that could revolutionize the
way work is done." If the point of the piece was to say that the money spent is
now looking like a tough call, then this idea should have been brought up
higher and developed. If the point is that despite such comments the
preparedness is a boon, then they should have been brought up higher and
answered. What the LAT does instead makes for a disorienting
neither-fish-nor-fowl story.

            The papers visit with some Y2K pessimists post-non-disaster. The Wall Street Journal finds a food storage executive who one
month last year sold $12 million worth of food packets instead of the usual $1
million and also spent $100,000 on Y2K contingency measures for himself and his
family; the man is now worried that the non-happening could mean his just-past
best year might be followed by his worst ever. And the NYT presents
the author of Time Bomb 2000 , who hands a visitor (= the Times
reporter) a free copy. The author expresses few regrets for whatever role he
played in getting companies, citizens, and government agencies to avoid
breakdowns. But then, his book, says the NYT , has sold a quarter-million
copies.

            The WP and LAT surprise by fronting the death of former
chief of naval operations Elmo Zumwalt Jr.--an anti-bureaucratic admiral who
tried to open up his starched white branch to flexible thinking and minority
sailors, but who was best known for having ordered the use of Agent Orange in
Vietnam, a decision which he came to believe caused the death of his own son
and the brain dysfunction of a grandson. The NYT and USAT play it
inside (although it seems a bit cockeyed that the latter puts it below a
gigantic story-with-pictures about a certain fellating fatso).

            There are apparently unstated limits to what the LAT 's "Hot Property"
counts as newsworthy about its glitzy buyers and sellers. Sunday's column, for
instance, in reporting that Tim Allen had bought Christian Slater's house, was
only too glad to tick off the actors' credits but didn't mention another
residential fact the two have in common--they've both done time.

            Sunday's NYT sports section ran, under the headline "You Must
Remember This," a selection of the 20th century's signal sports events.
Incredibly, only one of the cited 16 keepers--Bobby Thomson's home
run--occurred before 1960. This foreshortening of the century forced the
elimination of such undeniably epochal events as Jesse Owens' performance in
Berlin, Roger Bannister's breaking of the four-minute mile, and the Baltimore
Colts' sudden death championship win. The likely explanation is worrisome even
if (like Today's Papers) you don't follow sports: boomer editors who can't seem
to shake boomer sensibilities when they come to work.

            The headline over the NYT story about former House Ways and Means
major domo Dan Rostenkowski says he's back "showing a softer side," but you be
the judge. In commenting on Newt Gingrich's marital troubles, Rosty is quoted
saying, "Thank God, all my girls are dead."

         
      
   
