
   
   
      
         
            Religion 4.0

            One happy development the new millennium is apparently about to bring is the
formal death of the black Muslim belief that whites are "blue-eyed devils" who
were specially bred in the laboratory of an evil black scientist with the
suspiciously Jewish-sounding name Yacub. This good news comes in an article by
Arthur Magida posted on Beliefnet.com. Beliefnet.com is an interesting new
religion-oriented Web site founded by Steven Waldman,* a former editor at
U.S. News & World Report . According to Magida, Louis Farrakhan is
planning to announce in a speech next month that the Nation of Islam must merge
with plain-vanilla Islam, and in the process embrace the Koran's teachings on
racial equality, which apparently preclude the mad-scientist theory. (For a
helpful explication of the other cultlike aspects of the Nation of Islam, click
here.) The Nation of Islam is already pretty small--according to
Prof. Sulayman Nyang of Howard University, it has only 20,000 to 50,000
followers. It is dwarfed by the following of Elijah Muhammed's son, Warith Deen
Mohammed, a mainstream Muslim imam who rejected the "blue-eyed devils"
doctrines two decades ago, and who in 1998 told Jonah Blank of U.S.
News that he's "almost a fanatical supporter of the U.S.
government."

            Hoping to encourage what may be a nascent trend toward rationalism,
Chatterbox hereby challenges other religions to step forward and discard
outdated doctrines, such as, oh, papal infallibility, or Judaism's silly
prejudice against crabcakes and Lobster Thermidor. Readers are invited to
nominate religious doctrines they'd like to see jettisoned in the new year.
Please provide documentation that the objectionable practice you are citing
isn't made up.

            * personal friend of Chatterbox, as are several other people who write or
edit for Beliefnet.com; none of them wish to be associated in any way with
Chatterbox's belief that God doesn't actually exist.
            

         
      
   
