
   
   
      
         
            Why Are India and Pakistan Fighting?
            

             The five hijackers that commandeered
an Indian Airlines jet on Friday are reportedly demanding the release of
Kashmiri rebels imprisoned by India. Most newspaper stories suggest that the
50-year feud between India and Pakistan over Kashmir is the cause of the
hijacking, but few explain the dispute. What's the gist of the conflict?

            The controversy began in 1947, when Great Britain withdrew from the Indian
subcontinent, creating two states--India (predominantly Hindu) and Pakistan
(predominantly Muslim)--out of the subcontinent's hundreds of territories. The
Hindu ruler of Kashmir, a territory about twice the size of Virginia, agreed to
a union with India. Pakistan objected and went to war with India claiming that
Kashmir's majority Muslim population would prefer to join it.

            The United Nations brokered a peace agreement in 1949, dividing Kashmir
along a cease-fire line that has roughly held until today. India controls
two-thirds of the land and more than three quarters of the population. Both the
Pakistan-held Azad ("Free") Kashmir and the Indian-held Jammu
and Kashmir became semi-autonomous regions within the controlling nations.
The cease-fire agreement called for a plebiscite to decide the governance. It
has never been held, and the U.S. does not recognize either country's claim to
Kashmir. 

            The cease-fire has been marked by periodic fighting--including China's 1962
invasion of a portion of Kashmir that it still claims. In the early 1990s,
various Muslim insurgents in Indian-controlled Kashmir escalated the conflict
by demanding independence for Kashmir or union with Pakistan. They backed their
demands with kidnappings and bombings throughout Jammu and Kashmir. India
responded by sending more armed forces to the region. The rebels expanded, too,
receiving political support from the Pakistan and Afghanistan governments, and
manpower and money from Muslim groups in those nations. This summer,
hostilities approached all-out war between India and Pakistan, as the nations'
armies traded shots over the cease-fire line.

            Maulana Masood Azhar, the Pakistani-born Muslim cleric whose freedom the
hijackers are demanding, was an early leader of the Kashmiri independence
movement. He was arrested by India in 1994 for fomenting revolution. The Harkat
ul-Mujahedeen, which Azhar headed, is considered a terrorist organization by
the United States and is one of the most violent and extreme rebel groups. In
1995, it kidnapped--and likely killed--five Western tourists in a failed effort
to win Azhar's freedom.

            Next question?

         
      
   
