
   
   
      
         
            A Millennium Report Card

            In 1977, President Jimmy Carter directed the State Department and the White
House Council on Environmental Quality to make a study of "probable changes in
the world's population, natural resources, and environment through the end of
the century." The result, issued in 1980, was Global 2000 , remembered (perhaps a little
unfairly) as the definitive expression of Carteresque malaise about the future.
Copies of this report, which made a huge splash at the time and sold more than
1.5 million copies, are amazingly hard to come by today. The State Department
library no longer has a complete set, and a receptionist at CEQ told Chatterbox
it was inconceivable that a 20-year-old report would be retrievable there. The
Martin Luther King public library in Washington, D.C., said its last copy
disappeared from the shelves six years ago. Stephen Moore, an
anti-doomsaying scholar at the libertarian Cato Institute, told Chatterbox
that six months earlier a research assistant he'd asked to find a copy came
back empty-handed. Internet searches turned up no used bookstores in the
Washington area where you could buy Global 2000 .

            Eventually, however, Chatterbox was able to procure a copy of the summary
volume that was reissued by Seven Locks Press in 1991. Chatterbox then
conferred with Moore and with Ronald Bailey, editor of the anti-doomsaying
Earth Report 2000: Revisiting the True State of the
Planet , which was funded by the Competitive Enterprise Institute.
Moore, Bailey, Cato, and CEI can all be fairly described as having an
ideological animus against the fretful liberalism of Global 2000 , but then much the same can be
said of the liberal establishment's attitude toward Moore, Bailey, Cato, and
CEI. While Chatterbox didn't always buy Moore and Bailey's analyses, he
guessed--correctly, it turned out--that they'd prove quite knowledgeable and
rigorous on the facts. (Besides, nobody seemed to be around today at the World
Bank.)

            The general outlook projected in Global 2000 is neatly summarized at the
beginning:

            
               If present trends continue, the
world in 2000 will be more crowded, more polluted, less  stable ecologically,
and more vulnerable to disruption than the world we live in now [i.e.,
1980] . Serious stresses involving
population, resources, and environment are clearly visible ahead. Despite
greater material output, the world's people will be poorer in many ways than
they are today.
            

            
               For hundred of millions of the
desperately poor, the outlook for food and other necessities of life will be no
better. For many it will be worse. Barring revolutionary advances in
technology, life for most people on earth will be more precarious in 2000 than
it is now--unless the nations of the world act decisively to alter current
trends.
            

            Not exactly an invitation to break out the party hats on New Year's Eve. How
close to the truth is it?

            
1.)  Population. 
               Global 2000 predicts that the world
population will grow from 4 billion in 1975 to 6.35 billion (according to
"medium-growth projections") in 2000.

            
               
                  Comment:
               
The world population hit 6 billion this past autumn. Moore pointed out that this means Global 2000 is off by nearly 6 percent.
Bailey attributed the error to an
overestimation of the total world fertility rate, which (his book documents)
has nearly halved since the early 1960s. Chatterbox thinks Global 2000 got this one pretty close to
correct, however, and believes that, with the least developed countries seeing
very little decline in total fertility rate since the early 1960s, world
population remains worth worrying about.

            
               
                  Grade:
               

               Correct.
            

            
2.)  Food shortages. 
               Global 2000 says the price of food, adjusted
for inflation, will double between 1975 and 2000. Despite huge projected
increases in food production, per capita food consumption in South Asia, the
Middle East, and the less-developed nations of Africa "will scarcely improve or
will actually decline below present inadequate levels. "

            
               
                  Comment
               
               
: Moore and Bailey both said
this isn't true. "China's now exporting food," Moore pointed out. "As is India," Bailey added. Overall, world food prices have
"more than halved" since 1975, Bailey said. According to an index of food
prices in Bailey's book, food prices in 1996 were up 8 percent since 1990, but
down 113 percent since 1975. Today, Bailey says, world food prices are "back
below the 1990 price."

            
               Bailey said the total number of calories
consumed is "substantially up" in South Asia and the Middle East, but he
admitted Africa remains "a basket case."

            
               
                  Grade:
               

               Mostly Incorrect.
            

            3.) Energy.  According to
Global 2000 , between 1975-2000, "the
world's remaining petroleum resources  per capita can be expected to decline by
at least 50 percent." The price of energy will rise more than 150 percent,
factoring out inflation, during this same period.

                   
               
                  Comment:
                Everybody agreed this is wrong.
Although the price of oil has spiked lately, last time
Chatterbox checked it was $25 per barrel, which (factoring out inflation
and taxes) was less than it was in
1973 (when oil prices were lower
than they were in Global 2000 's
benchmark year of 1975).

                   
               
                  Grade:
                
               Incorrect.
            

            
4.)  Deforestation. Between 1975
and 2000, the Third World will lose 40 percent of its remaining forest
cover.

            
               
                  Comment:
               
Neither Moore nor Bailey claimed to know much about this, but
both cited an essay in an earlier edition of Bailey 's book that said tropical
deforestation rates were about 8 percent during the 1980s. Assuming the same
rate of tropical deforestation in the 1990s, Global 2000 would be off by a factor of at
least two. Chatterbox continues to
worry that the rainforest is disappearing, but agrees the 40 percent figure is
probably too high.

            
               
                  Grade:
               

               Incorrect.
            

            
5.)  Climate change. Global warming
will alter the world's climate "significantly" by 2050.

            
               
                  Comment
               
               
: Obviously nobody knows, but Moore and Bailey both grudgingly admitted that the
evidence for global warming has grown since 1980.

            
               
                  Grade:
               

               Essentially correct.
            

            
6.)  Growing income disparities between
wealthy and poor nations. GNP is projected to increase everywhere,
especially in Latin America, but by 2000 North America, Western Europe,
Australia, New Zealand, and Japan will average more than $11,000 in per-capita
GNP (1975 dollars), while India, Bangladesh, and Pakistan, will all remain
below $200 in per-capita GNP (1975 dollars). Overall, the per-capita GNP gap
between industrialized and Third World nations will grow from $4,000 in 1975 to
"about $7,900" in 2000. 
            

            
               
                  Comment:
               

               Moore and Bailey agreed this all sounded about right.
Bailey directed Chatterbox's
attention to a chart that seemed to support this in a World Bank report called
Entering
the 21 st Century (see figure 8 in the introduction, "New
Directions in Development Thinking").
                  

                  
               
            

            
               
                  Grade: Correct. 
               
            

            Granting that
the above sampling is hardly scientific, Chatterbox concludes that
Global 
               2000 's pessimism is overstated roughly 50 percent of
the time, and justified roughly 50 percent of the time. In other words, Jimmy
Carter's commission was half right, which is about par for the course when it
comes to predicting the future (to test this proposition, flip a coin several
times). Another, perhaps less parochial, way to look at Global 2000 is
to observe that the millennium is proving to be about 50 percent as disastrous
as Jimmy Carter predicted it would be. This is either good news or bad news,
depending on your temperament.

         
      
   
