
   
   
      
         
            The Backlash Against the Backlash Against Irony

            The backlash against the backlash against irony has begun, and just in time.
Deriding irony is now a reflex not just among the serious, such as Jedediah
Purdy, the author of For Common Things , but among the ironic as well.
Take Infinite Jest author David Foster Wallace, who has called irony the
source of "a great despair and stasis in U.S. culture." Or former Spin
editor and wit-about-town Michael Hirschorn, who, agreeing with Purdy in a

                  Slate
                "Dialogue," deemed irony "a
comfortable perch from which we can be unserious about the environment, not to
mention labor unions, third-world malnutrition, ethnic conflict, wage
disparities, corporate malfeasance." When master ironists feel the need to
disparage, non-ironically, the very instinct that animates them, you know that
we've all traveled too far down the path toward neurotic self-negation.

            Hence Culturebox's relief at the first glimmers of a countertrend--three
articles and one movie defending irony in the past three weeks. The first piece
was an unsigned Dec. 18 editorial in the Economist , endorsing the
opinion of an essayist from the British Foreign Office who considers irony a
necessary virtue in a post-colonial world: It "suggests a certain modesty about
oneself, one's values, and one's aspirations. At least irony is unlikely to be
used to justify programmes of conquest or extermination." The second article was by critic and novelist David Gates in Newsweek ,
claiming in somewhat overblown newsweekly fashion that irony and ironic
juxtapositions are "an inevitable response to the human condition. The original
ironic juxtaposition, after all, is the spirit plunked down into the material
world." The third was Slate 's own Chatterbox,
who argues for irony on the charmingly loopy ground that it is a fin de
siècle condition, and that one corrective for the fin de siècle
condition is, historically, the election of non-ironic presidents, whose ranks
might include not just Al Gore and Bill Bradley but also the frightening
Gary Bauer, Orrin Hatch, and Alan
Keyes.

            What unites all of these articles is a certain earnestness: Their authors
are not joking (well, Chatterbox sort of is). Irony, they say, is
good --good for foreign policy, good for the soul, even good for the
presidency. Which brings us to Man on the Moon , a movie celebrating
comedian Andy Kaufman, whose performances were ironic in the deepest sense.
Sweet, gentle, and never sarcastic, Kaufman was a kind of holy fool. He refused
to wink at the audience so as to let them know that his nonsense was a put-on.
Wrestling irate women? Bashing the South, in the South? Being an inept and
unfunny foreigner with no business on stage? Kaufman refused to reassure you
that any of it was a joke. The movie has no such qualms, however. It is a
conventional celebrity biopic, lionizing its subject at every possible turn,
and congratulating itself for its insight. It winks nonstop. See? the
movie says, S ee how great Andy was? See how stupid everyone else was,
because they didn't get it? See how smart we are, who do get it?
            

            Man on the Moon is so insufferable it made Culturebox wonder whether the
entire effort to defend irony nonironically, welcome though it is, is somehow
doomed to fail. Does the very effort to defend irony to those impervious to its
charms require you to trick it up as something it is not? After all, irony is
not for anything. It has no higher purpose. It is a perspective on the
world, one that takes advantage of distance and some weirdly skewed point of
view to see everyday things--pomposity, convention, higher purposes, and the
earnest advancement of points like this one--as ridiculous or sad or just
somehow other than what they usually seem. It's a lens that is morally
neutral, deployed for evil as easily as for good. (There are philosophers who
argue that the ironic sensibility is morally preferable, because it makes you
aware of limitations, but Culturebox would argue that what they really mean by
irony is the tragic vision of the world, not a particular trick of speech or
performance.) 

            Andy Kaufman would have been horrified by the implication that he was better
than the people who failed to understand him, if only because that would have
made him so easy to skewer. The people on whose behalf David Gates is
pleading--Quentin Tarantino, Lorrie Moore, Beck--would not be happy to know
that their particular slant on life expresses the universal human condition.
The Economist gets a little closer to the heart of the matter when its
editorialist writes, "Many people, when hearing an ironic remark, may not
realize that it is meant in jest. ... those who realize that an ironic remark
has been made are instantly complicit, and they can enjoy the fact that there
are others who have missed the joke." In other words, irony is how the
superior--presumably of class, certainly of intellect--get together and exclude
the idiots. It's funny, and it's fun, and Culturebox, for one, couldn't live
without it. But it's neither virtuous nor defensible.

         
      
   
