
   
   
      
         
            Reality Bites Value America
            

            Whatever the Internet will become, one of the things it's been in the last
couple of years is a consumer's paradise, at least from a price perspective. In
their hunger to acquire new customers, Net retailers have engaged in good
old-fashioned price wars and have more generally made Net shoppers so
accustomed to sizable discounts that paying anything close to retail feels like
you're being robbed.

            The question, of course, has always been whether these retailers were
actually ever going to be able to make money when their business often seemed,
as venture capitalist Bill Gurley so smartly put it, to be the equivalent of
giving consumers who visited their sites a dollar in exchange for 95 cents. In
the past few weeks, we're starting to see signs that, in fact, a lot of these
Internet retailers are not only not going to be able to make money. They may
not even be able to stay in business for much longer.

            The most telling such sign was the announcement yesterday by Value America
that it was going to slash its work force by 47 percent, slim down its product
offerings, leave five of the 12 buildings it now occupies, and make meaningful
cuts in its ad spending. Value America also announced that its revenue for the
fourth quarter will fall 6 percent to 9 percent short of analysts' estimates
and that it will lose significantly more than analysts had expected in the
quarter.

            Value America has been this one-stop shopping site, where you could buy
everything from food to printers to appliances to computers. (Computers like
the one on which I'm writing this column, actually, bought this summer for a
very nice price.) It now plans to focus on selling computers and consumer
electronics, which on the one hand is a natural strategy for targeting Web
users and, on the other hand, is a strategy that everyone else in America has
already figured out and embraced. So the idea that the new approach is going to
rescue the company seems rather dubious.

            What's interesting about the Value America story, though, is that it
represents an unusual intrusion of the things we've gotten used to about
offline business into the online world. Up to this point, with rare exceptions,
business on the Internet has seemed to exist in this fairy-tale realm where no
one ever gets fired, where expenses are irrelevant, and where all losses are
tolerated as simply necessary investments in the future. By eliminating 280
jobs, cutting the number of suppliers it uses by 90 percent, and admitting that
it's running through its capital much faster than originally planned, Value
America is essentially demonstrating what we all knew, but just weren't sure
when it would come true: Eventually, you have to earn a profit or else you'll
go under.

            Now, there are limits to the value, so to speak, of Value America as a
cautionary tale. In the first place, the site was never that popular, and even
now is only the 90th most popular Web shopping site. More important, Value
America's everything-including-the-kitchen-sink strategy was ill-conceived,
especially for a company that had no real brand name. For Amazon.com to branch
out from books into CDs and then videos and then consumer electronics means one
thing. For Value America to start by offering everything is another. And,
finally, there are Net retailers--Amazon, most notably--who are not just
running a business on hope, smoke, and mirrors; who have thought seriously
about their cost structures; and understand things like return on invested
capital. That doesn't mean they will succeed, but it means they have a much
better chance than most of the companies out there.

            Even so, what's happening to Value America does have implications for the
Net as a whole, especially when so many Net retailers dumped tens of millions
of dollars into pre-Christmas advertising with, by all accounts, very little
payoff (relative to investment). And perhaps the most important thing to think
about is that if Value America goes under, it increasingly looks like it will
do just that: go under and disappear. In other words, no one is going to come
along and acquire it, because ultimately there's really nothing there to
acquire. The conventional wisdom has been that eventually we'd see
consolidation in Net retailing through mergers and acquisitions. It's starting
to seem more likely that we'll see consolidation through failure.

         
      
   
