
   
   
      
         
            Hits and Misses
            

            Dear Jack,

            I'm glad you picked up on the alternative newspaper question, for two
reasons. One, it spotlights the frustrating limits of Rosen's definitions of
journalism and journalists. There is nary a mention in this thick book of any
of the leading "alternative" weeklies, which are often stuffed with material
that one might expect to intrigue Rosen. There's also little mention of
national magazines, whether specialized political ones or big general-interest
ones. There's almost no attention paid to radio, where hundreds of of excellent
American journalists work, and only at the end does Rosen acknowledge the
development of the Internet as a news medium. Even television doesn't get much
play here, at least not compared with the audience it garners in real life. In
other words: For someone with as sweeping and academic-seeming a criticism as
Rosen's, he's done a poor job of defining the terms of what journalists do,
where they work, and how they operate.

            Two, as you indicate, "alternative" newspapers have been thriving, many for
decades, by providing readers with exactly the kind of service Rosen says he
wants: reporting with perspective; reader inclusion; making stories into
crusades; etc. Their "success" in doing so is of course debatable, but it makes
you wonder: Has Rosen simply never read those papers? Or is he avoiding using
them as models? My guess is the latter. I'll bet it's a prestige problem. The
folks at Pew Charitable Trust and the other purse strings of public journalism
would scream: "We didn't cough up several million dollars so you could tell the
media to behave like the goddamned Village Voice ."

            That said, I think you're being awfully sanguine about the state of American
media. I find most American newspapers to be quite bad; to argue that they
might once have been worse is neither reassuring nor really the point. Most
television journalism is horrendous, and some is actually harmful (by
misinforming viewers about crime, for example). Either you want that situation
to change or you don't, but denying it seems silly.

            You're also arguing against straw men of your own creation: A journalist
does not need to have a "lunch-pail and straphanger" audience in order to be
out of touch. Pick up a copy of the Miami Herald (or, for that matter,
the San Francisco Chronicle ), and tell me with a straight face that
those papers are doing the best job they can to reflect and report life in
those cities. Remind me which prime-time network news show it is that deals
with immigration, public education, workplace discrimination, and how to solve
health and child-care problems. Seems to me that whenever I tune in I am asked
to contemplate "The Miracle of Sextuplets."

            As for presidential politics, we agree that poor coverage is not exclusively
the media's fault, or even principally its fault. But it also seems a cop-out
to say that if the candidates don't disagree, then there's no way to cover the
issues. I don't think that some of the experiments in this book are all that
bad for that kind of coverage. That is, start with local issues; in my
neighborhood, they include AIDS, homelessness, housing prices, and the need for
a Second Avenue subway. Then look to what candidates can offer (skeptically, of
course, since the real story may be that these problems elude solutions on the
presidential level). If they don't disagree one iota, then maybe there's a
political problem, but I don't think there would be a problem producing good or
interesting journalism. I suspect, by the way, that the better New York papers
will do something like this as the primary approaches, though they won't call
it public journalism.

         
      
   
