
   
   
      
         
            Run of the Millennium Stories

            The Los
Angeles Times and New York Times lead with (and the
Wall Street Journal tops its front-page world-wide
news box with) yesterday's wide-ranging law enforcement action on the trail of
the Algerian terrorist group implicated in that bomb-smuggling arrest in
Washington state two weeks ago, action that netted a number of arrests in
different cities, including one of an Algerian living in Brooklyn who had
recently traveled to Seattle. Both papers report in addition that the feds are
saying that the Canadian woman recently arrested trying to come into Vermont
and the man caught in Seattle are both associates of a known Algerian
terrorist. The Washington Post off-leads the story, going instead with
Washington, D.C.'s final preparations for its giant millennial celebration.
USA
Today , which through the miracle of extended newsstand dating becomes
the first U.S. daily newspaper to appear with a 2000 time-hack, gives its front
over to an essay, "The Next Century," which spends most of its time reviewing
this one, predictably arcing over the likes of McCarthyism, Martin Luther King,
and Dylan but then swerving into the writer's mother's sister and his wife's
mother. Not to mention Paul Gorman, who we learn was killed in a freakish
motorcycle accident; what we don't learn is who he was. And in the God-said-ha
department, the wires report the death of the world's oldest person, at age
119, who therefore missed by mere hours the superhuman hat trick of drawing
breath in three centuries.

            The NYT reports that the Brooklyn arrest was accomplished by "a
black-clad antiterrorist task force," while one in Boston involved feds giving
chase with guns drawn. Both papers imply that the Brooklyn arrest was helped
along by an informant. The coverage says the Seattle bomb-smuggling plan
reflected sophistication, although the LAT notes "a major slip-up"
occurred when the man arrested in Brooklyn, although registered under an alias
at a hotel in Seattle, used his real address.

            The coverage makes it clear that beyond anything specifically tied to the
Seattle bomb, the cops were doing a bit of street sweeping. The WP
quotes one expert referring to probable "preemptive arrests," and saying that
the FBI would "nail [those arrested] for anything they can, just to get them
off the streets."

            A front-page WP story reports that federal investigators on the Wen
Ho Lee case are now looking into the possibility that Lee passed nuclear
secrets not to China, but to Taiwan. The story points out that Lee has long
done consulting work for a Taiwan military institute and has two sisters who
still live on the island.

            Both the WP and NYT detect hordes of non-hoards. The
Post has local merchants telling of increased traffic in bottled water,
batteries, candles, etc., but nothing out of control. And the Times says
that the extra $255 for each man, woman, and child added to the money supply
for Y2K is just sitting there in banks.

            The NYT lead editorial on the 20th century salutes "the most
distinctive of all American inventions, a society based on the values of
political freedom, economic opportunity, individual worth and equal justice."
The WP puts forth a gigantic effort to assess the entire 2nd millennium,
with sprawling essays on the span's history, and on its concepts of liberty,
love, hate, ingenuity, fear, beauty, thought, and mystery. The effort on
history says, "The best invention of the millennium is widely considered to be
the printing press, which is obvious and right. The rest of the top 10 are:
glass lenses, the orchestra, the clock pendulum, electrification, the birth
control pill, refrigeration, anesthesia, indoor plumbing, and antibiotics. The
most overrated invention of the millennium is the spacecraft." The section also
assesses the millennium's worst year as 1347 (bubonic plague comes to the
Continent) and its best as 1789 (French Revolution, George Washington takes
office, the factory system is born, bourbon is invented, Mozart writes two
piano sonatas, and Beethoven writes two preludes).

            On the LAT op-ed page, Robert Reich states, "Eventually almost
everyone in the U.S. will be working directly or indirectly for MCI-Worldcom,
Microsoft, Disney or AT&T." And the NYT explains that contrary to
other holidays, where status in the organization is measured by the
number/quality of party invites and the relative coolness of one's vacation
plans, for tonight the most important people in the outfit are the ones who
will be working. Suddenly, Today's Papers feels very important.

         
      
   
