
   
   
      
         
            Is David Letterman Y2K-Compliant?

            Among the questions unexplored in the reams of news copy commemorating the
20 th century's end is the likely fate of Boomer Irony. Chatterbox
agrees with Jedediah
Purdy that there's too much of it (though he hasn't bothered to read
Purdy's book; Chatterbox feels that William McGowan covered
the subject pretty comprehensively in a three-page article* published in the
Washington Monthly in 1986, under the headline "Why David Letterman Is
Bad for America"). But Chatterbox--who is, after all, a Boomer--is not willing
entirely to give up the habit of discoursing ironically. It is therefore
with some apprehension that Chatterbox views the coming of a new century.

            Boomer Irony is, after all, a distinctly fin de siècle phenomenon.
Here is how Britannica.com defines fin de siècle :

            

               
                  of, relating to, characteristic of, or resembling the
late-19 th -century literary and artistic climate of sophistication,
escapism, extreme aestheticism, world-weariness, and fashionable despair. When
used in reference to literature, the term essentially describes the movement
inaugurated by the 
                  Decadent 
                  poets of France and the movement called

                  Aestheticism 
                  in England during this
period.
               

            

            Sound familiar? (To sample some bona fide fin de siècle art and
poetry, click here.)

            Bill Clinton's sexual indiscretions (not to mention his casual perjury about
them) make him a very fin de siècle president, though as a policymaker
he's clearly superior to William McKinley. Should history repeat itself, we
should expect next year to elect a humorless, no-nonsense president like Teddy
Roosevelt. (Chatterbox is not so fin de siècle as to contemplate that
this president would take office as Roosevelt did--succeeding a predecessor who
dies in office.) This speaks well for the chances of Al Gore** and Bill
Bradley, and poorly for those of the smirky George W. Bush. (John McCain is a
hard case, being conventionally brave and forthright but also kind of a cutup;
his crack about propping up a dead Alan Greenspan à la Weekend at
Bernie's was very fin de siècle .) However, to give an appropriate
nod to the underdogs, the TR model also speaks well for the chances of Gary
Bauer, Orrin Hatch, and Alan Keyes (none of whom has an ironic or decadent bone
in his body, as far as Chatterbox can see). You begin to see the cause for
Chatterbox's anxiety.

            * edited by Chatterbox
            

            ** Though Gore does have an ironic, Boomerish sense of humor, he
shows so little of it to the public that he might as well not have one.
            

         
      
   
