
   
   
      
         
            Clichés of 1999 in Review

            
               Introduction
            

            Chatterbox's request that readers submit nominations for the First Annual
Joseph Heller Memorial Cliché Contest  yielded a huge response. What
explains Web readers' great interest in clichés? Perhaps it's a rebellion
against the printing press, a technology whose usefulness is now being
challenged by the Internet. Cliché,
which (according to the Oxford English Dictionary) is French for "to click,"
refers to the "striking of melted lead in order to obtain a proof or cast."
That is, it describes a process of  printmaking in which a metal plate is cast
from something else (a woodcut, a plaster mold) and then used to make copies.
The English term for this process is stereotype , which has acquired a similar
pejorative meaning. Of course, Web aficionados should take care not to be
too scornful of the old-style
printing press's capacity to reproduce images ad absurdum , since the Web has vastly
expanded it. Indeed, it's quite possible that in the next century the terms
"cliché" and "stereotype" will be supplanted by new terms derived from the
Internet. We may find ourselves saying: "I'm sick to death of  html like 'be there in a San Jose minute" or:
"Androids resent being homepaged as
unfeeling simply because they're manufactured rather than born." In the
meantime, cliché-obsessed readers may wish to consult the many cliché-oriented
sites available on the Web. These include the Cliché Finder; The Book of
Clichés; Cirque de Cliché ;
Steve's Clichés; Sports
Clichés; Movie
Clichés;  Dutch Clichés; and the Web page of David
Cliché, an official of Canada's Quebecois party.  

            
               A Word About Method:
            

            Although some readers submitted citations along with their entries, per
Chatterbox's request, most did not. Also, readers' methods for counting
citations varied greatly--some used Nexis, some used Dow Jones News Retrieval,
some used Yahoo, and so on. In the end, Chatterbox took the advice of reader
Josh Green, a graduate of Northwestern's Medill School of Journalism, which every summer
calculates the year's biggest political cliché by using the search engine for
the Congressional
Record . Chatterbox took the better entries from readers and plugged
them into the Record 's search engine
to see how often they were uttered in Congress between Jan. 1 and Dec. 27,
1999.

             
               And the Winner Is ...
            

            "Inappropriate ," submitted by
Thomas E. Ricks,* defense reporter for the Washington Post and author
of Making the Corps . This term made more appearances in
the Congressional Record (382) than
any other word or phrase nominated (at least among the ones Chatterbox bothered
to check). "Inappropriate" easily outstripped "evil," a word that appeared in
the Congressional Record a mere 250
times, though--William Bennett, Gertrude Himmelfarb, and other denouncers of
moral relativism take note-- it still lagged behind "wrong," which appeared in
excess of 999 times (the CR search
engine doesn't count beyond three digits).

            What was inappropriate in 1999?
The designation of several non-emergency categories of spending as emergency
spending (according to a resolution submitted by Sens. Phil Gramm, Olympia
Snowe, and Russell Feingold); proposed oil drilling along the California coast
(according to Rep. Randy "Duke" Cunningham); Bill Clinton's relationship with
Monica Lewinsky (according to a resolution submitted by several Democratic
senators); lots of arts funded by the National Endowment for the Arts
(according to Rep. Ron Packard); sex between children and adults (according to
a House resolution endorsed by just about everybody that apparently came out of
a broadcast by radio therapist Dr. Laura Schlessinger); and many, many other things.

            It must be said, however, that the rate at which Congress is deeming things
"inappropriate " is down slightly
from the 1997-8 session, when during a two-year period the word "inappropriate " appeared in the CR 824 times. To hold steady, "inappropriate " would have had to appear 412
times.

            
               Runners-up:
            

            "At the end of the day " is a
phrase that drove several 
                  Slate
                readers bonkers this year.
Chatterbox had thought it old hat (it dates back at least to the Bush
administration), but the phrase appeared 272 times in the CR database for 1999, ranking it second among
all submissions. That's an increase
in its frequency of appearance over the previous congressional session, when
the word was uttered only 401 times during a two-year period. At this rate,
lawmakers will end up talking about the
end of the day 544 times before the current session ends in Dec. 2000. Many
thanks to readers Bill Moran, Darren Thorneycroft, and Nicholas Lemann* (author
of The Big Test ) for flagging this one.

            "Robust " came in third among
words and phrases submitted (220 citations in the CR ), and unlike the previous two, it seems to
be a genuinely new cliché; at any
rate, Chatterbox hadn't previously been aware of its overuse.  Like "at the end
of the day," its use is on the upswing (one might even call it robust) , with only 336 citations during the
previous congressional session. According to John Burke, who submitted
"robust ," it is

            

               
                  The most overused, overworked,
hackneyed word in the cliche-ridden vocabulary of pols and their speechwriters,
D.C. bureaucrats, think-tank thinkers, pundits and even lowly working reporters
condemned to write about legislation and policy making. You know, everything
has to be robust now: a robust foreign policy, a robust national defense, a
robust air attack on Serbia, a robust police crackdown, a robust anti-drug
policy, a robust investigation of abuses.  Most political activities are
robust, too: a robust campaign, a robust fundraising program, a robust reponse
to critics, a robust position on you-name-it.
               

            

            Agreed.

            
               Clichés to watch in 2000:
            

            Many excellent nominations failed to garner as many CR citations as Chatterbox expected. These
include: "wake-up call" (46); "above my pay grade" (41); "paralysis by
analysis" (2); "new facts on the ground" (1); and "mano a mano " (1), which, as reader Jay Brida
pointed out, is always misused (it's Spanish not for "man to man," but "hand to
hand"). These are all comers, in Chatterbox's view.

            * Personal friend of Chatterbox

            

         
      
   
