
   
   
      
         
            It's the Economy, Stupid
            

            I'm not as thoroughly dismissive of public journalism as you are, but I
think we end up in the same place. To give this dialogue the semblance of a
fair fight, allow me to delineate at least some things that I think Rosen and
his allies get right.

            

               American journalism, especially print journalism, is in crisis. For most of
the mainstream press audiences have been shrinking for some time. Serious
journalism has become difficult to do in many places, and some wonder whether
it's worth doing.

               Coverage of most political campaigns is poor and tends to focus on trivial
matters. Every year, there are probably dozens of exceptions to this rule, but
it seems fundamentally right to me.

               Journalists, as a class, seem removed from the communities they cover.
Again, there are exceptions, especially in small towns, but I think it's pretty
rare to see community board meetings overflowing with local journalists out to
better their neighborhoods.

               Coverage of political issues too often gels around easy, conflict-based
poles, to the detriment of anyone's understanding. I see this especially on
television.

            

            It's hard to tell from reading Rosen, but one can believe all these things
and still not subscribe to the philosophy of public journalism. (Indeed, Rosen
often writes as if there were no significant criticism of American journalism
until about 1989.)

            Where I think Rosen and company begin to fall down is with the assumptions
that 1) these problems are the result of current journalistic theory and
practice, and 2) it is the urgent responsibility of journalists to change the
nature of what they do.

            There are many, many darts to be thrown at these assumptions, but I'll start
with one of the sharpest: The crisis of American journalism to which public
journalism responded was largely an economic crisis. Rosen's school flourished
in the early-'90s recession, when newspapers were folding, budgets were being
slashed, and the Net was a place for wizards to swap software wands. Change
those economic facts, and the need for public journalism recedes
remarkably.

            Until tomorrow,
Jim

         
      
   
