
   
   
      
         
            Someday (Maybe), You'll Buy Cars on the Web
            

            The promise of the Internet, from a business perspective, is the promise of
a frictionless economy, in which buyers and sellers are able to meet without
mediation. And since perhaps the most disliked mediators out there are car
dealers, they would seem to be natural and inevitable casualties of consumers'
migration to the Internet. Very few people like bargaining with car dealers.
Auto companies don't like their now-almost-required reliance on rebates to move
cars. And the whole phenomenon of the huge dealership, with acres of cars, each
depreciating by the minute, seems like an archaic way of handling distribution
(and, since someone has to make all those cars, production).

            At the same time, the smartest auto manufacturers, like Ford and Toyota, are
already working hard at integrating the Internet into their operations and
developing build-to-order systems. Eventually, you should be able to
communicate directly with Ford, pick out the car you want with the options you
want, and have it delivered to your door, just like a Dell PC. Ford won't have
to make cars it's not going to be able to sell, and you won't have to haggle
with some dealer. (This was what I was imagining at the end of the last
Moneybox, when I wrote about GM truly becoming an Internet company.)

            The only problem with this picture of the future is that it's currently
against the law. Just about every state in the United States, in fact, has
strong franchise laws that limit the size and scope of dealerships, effectively
regulate the allocation of vehicles to dealers, bar large-volume discounts, and
prevent dealers from selling across state lines. Needless to say, actually
buying a car on the Internet is therefore impossible, which is why all the
car-buying services on the Net are actually local filtering devices, allowing
you to comparison-shop. That's an obvious advance over the old days, but it's
still a long way from a real Internet market.

            In essence, local car dealers have been able to create and maintain
geographic oligopolies through the use of franchise laws. That's one reason why
the category-killer approach to car-selling, exemplified by AutoNation (which
just announced it was closing its used-car superstores), has floundered so
badly. If Wal-Mart weren't able to offer lower prices in its stores because it
was barred from getting volume discounts from its suppliers, it would hardly be
a powerhouse retailer. Economics of scale come into play only if things get
cheaper the bigger you get. Otherwise you've just got more overhead.

            But while the demise of the car superstore should probably be lamented, the
really nefarious impact of the state franchise laws is unquestionably on the
not-yet-existing Net market. Those laws are in part a product of older concerns
about vertical integration, so that they served the function of keeping the
auto-makers from selling direct to consumers. And they also allow states to
keep a tight grip on the tax revenue from auto sales. But they are almost
textbook examples of bad regulation, which accomplish nothing but putting lots
of money in dealers' pockets.

            Even if Congress, say, were to pass a law permitting the direct sale of
cars, that wouldn't mean that auto-makers would embrace direct selling
immediately. An article in the new Fast Company , for instance, suggests
that Toyota's management was hesitant to Web-ify the company precisely because
it was afraid that would lead to direct sales, which would alienate dealers
(and break the law). And it's plausible that a car is such a big purchase that
many people are going to be uncomfortable buying one online, sight unseen. But
as an alternative, one can easily imagine something like what Gateway does now
with its Country Stores, where you can test-drive a PC and then order it
immediately online. There will, of course, be auto manufacturers that even a
decade from now are still working through the traditional dealer system. But if
you look at the PC industry, and the difference between the success of
direct-selling Dell and Gateway and the struggles of dealer-centric Compaq and
IBM, the idea that those auto manufacturers who stay tied to dealers will
flourish seems dubious indeed.

            Of course, first all those laws have to be changed.

         
      
   
