
   
   
      
         
            The Indefensible Stanley Fish

            To readers of British fiction, Stanley Fish, the new dean of arts and
sciences at the University of Illinois in Chicago and the second-most-famous
English professor in America--after Harvard's Henry Louis Gates Jr.--is
indistinguishable from Morris Zapp. Everyone knows that the character in David
Lodge's trilogy Changing Places, Small World, and Nice Work , the
most popular campus novels since Kingsley Amis' Lucky Jim , was based on
Fish, Lodge's good friend. Zapp, a jetsetting, starfucking, and intellectually
luminous American deconstructionist whose charm lies in his gleeful disregard
for scholarly convention, aspires to become the highest-paid English professor
in the world. What's wrong with that? he asks.

            To readers of American newspapers, however, particularly the Wall Street
Journal editorial page, Fish is the symbol of how the left is wrecking
American universities. Fish's sin, according to his journalistic critics, is
moral relativism. He is the founder of "reader-response" criticism, which holds
that texts don't have intrinsic meaning--meaning is a byproduct of the
encounter between reader and text. He advocates campus speech codes, the
ultimate in political correctness. He defends the cultural-studies journal
Social Text and the field of "science studies," even after they were
humiliated through a brilliant prank by physicist Alan Sokal. And yes, he
is one of the highest-paid English professors around. He currently gets
$230,000 a year from the University of Illinois. This, it is felt, does not
reflect an amusing brashness. It reflects a lack of principle.

            An implicit answer to these and other criticisms can be found in Fish's
latest book, The Trouble With Principle (Harvard University Press,
$24.95) . It opens with a scene from a movie--Sam Peckinpah's western
The Wild Bunch. Outlaws Ernest Borgnine and William Holden are
discussing a friend who has betrayed them by becoming a railroad detective. Why
would their friend do a thing like that? Borgnine asks. Holden explains: The
friend gave his word to the railroad. So what? Borgnine replies: "It isn't
giving your word that's important; it's who you give your word to."

            Most people would agree with Holden that a code of honor is worth at least
paying lip service to. The combative Fish sides with Borgnine. "The trouble
with principle," he writes, "is, first, it does not exist, and second, that
nowadays many bad things are done in its name." None of the ideals a liberal
society is supposed to be based on, Fish argues--fairness, impartiality,
reasonableness--is ever truly neutral or principled. They all mask a political
agenda. If all disputes over abstract ideals are, as Fish says, attempts to
exploit an elevated moral language for partisan advantage, then to hell with
his critics and their faith in chimera such as free speech and scientific
objectivity! To hell with conservatives and their absolute values! To hell with
liberals and their cherished notion of tolerance, since the people who benefit
from it (such as fundamentalists and supremacists) would punch a liberal silly
if they found one in a dark alley. The only beliefs that matter, says Fish, are
the ones that matter directly to you. In the case of Stanley Fish, those are
"my convictions and commitments."

            Before you dismiss Fish as either a danger to democratic values or a
pugilistic idiot, you have to know three more things about him. First, he's a
remarkable scholar. As a young man in the 1960s, he single-handedly dragged his
chosen specialty, John Milton studies, into the modern era. The field was mired
in a stale debate over whether Paradise Lost is flawed because it
contradicts itself--Satan is an appealing character, even though Milton appears
to side with God, etc. Fish took Milton's contradictions to be a dramatization
of the theological paradoxes of his day, rather than mere literary error.

            Second, Fish is a political realist, not a head-in-the-clouds theorist. He
is receiving such a princely sum from the University of Illinois not just
because he's famous--or notorious--but because he was the chief architect of
two of the most well-thought-of (though controversial) American academic
programs in the 1980s and '90s, Johns Hopkins University's Humanities Center
and Duke University's English department. His success as an administrator
rested on two insights that are now commonplace: first, that the academic star
system could be used to create departments with high-profile brand names, and
second, that the longing of academic couples to live in the same place
represents an administrative opportunity, not a headache. Fish built both the
Humanities Center and Duke's English department by hiring celebrity couples and
finding room for both, rather than wooing one member of the couple and
banishing the other to a lesser department, or condemning husband and wife to a
commuter marriage. That both departments are now falling apart can be chalked
up either to his considerable skill at maintaining allies or to his cynical
lack of concern with long-term stability.

            Third, it is not as easy as it seems to lump Fish with the progressives and
utopianists who dominate the cultural and intellectual left. The Trouble
With Principle , with its typically Fishy mix of transgressiveness and
realism, demonstrates the distance between him and them. The book's best essay
by far is an attack on multiculturalism. In it, Fish argues that
multiculturalism is a logical impossibility. His brief goes like this: There
are two kinds of multiculturalism, "weak" (or "boutique") "multiculturalism"
and "strong multiculturalism." "Weak multiculturalism," says Fish, is a watery
tolerance for cultural diversity. Weak multiculturalists hold that the
differences between people are trivial, because there are certain central
values--tolerance, respecting the dignity of individual rights, etc--that
supersede everything else. Weak multiculturalists do not tolerate practices,
such as polygamy or female circumcision, that offend those values. Strong
multiculturalists recognize that some differences are irreconcilable, but say
you must put up with them. In the end, Fish argues, both multiculturalisms are
really uniculturalism. Weak multiculturalists simply impose their Western,
liberal values on everyone else. Strong multiculturalists, if they follow their
argument to its extremes, end up having to support some other culture whose
basic principles violate their own--thereby elevating the values of that
culture above their own.

            If there are no rules for living peacefully in an ethnically mixed society,
what do we do now? Why, says Fish, we do what we have always done, since we
have never really practiced multiculturalism. We improvise. We engage in
something Fish calls, borrowing the phrase from a philosopher named Charles
Taylor, "inspired adhoccery." We decide what to do on a case-by-case basis.
When it makes sense to offer a major in Hindi studies, we offer a major in
Hindi studies. When animal sacrifices become sufficiently offensive, we outlaw
them. This, he adds, is not a recommendation. It is how we do things already,
and the sooner we admit that, the better we'll get at it.

            This may be well and good for multiculturalism, but Fish has bigger targets
in mind. The most troubling essay in the book is called "Mission Impossible."
Here Fish claims that there is no such thing as liberalism, since liberalism's
only way of dealing with those who don't agree with it is forcibly to exclude
them, mostly by calling them mad. It's an old argument, but Fish makes it new
by going back to the source--John Locke--and showing that in order to arrive at
the principle of separation of church and state (the bedrock of liberal polity
), Locke had to define religion as an internal process, each man's war "upon
his own lusts and vices." In so doing, says Fish, Locke defines religion away,
or at least all religions with strong beliefs and problematic forms of public
worship. Locke does acknowledge that in some rare cases churches must be
suppressed, but, he says, that's not a problem--we'll know which ones to
suppress because they will be condemned "by the judgment of all mankind." Right
there, says Fish, Locke undoes his own argument, since "the judgment of all
mankind" requires a reigning consensus that doesn't exist. If it did, Locke
wouldn't have had to invent liberalism. Liberals, rather than practicing
tolerance, have by acts of intellectual (and real) violence elevated their own
ideas of what will and won't do to the status of that which is universally
right.

            The philosophy Fish is practicing here bears some resemblance to pragmatism,
a turn-of-the-century American doctrine that has recently been revived and
wedded to European postmodernism. Modern pragmatism is a powerful brew of
relativism--the idea that all truths are situational--and the optimistic belief
that things work themselves out in the end. But Fish is not an upbeat
pragmatist. His vision of society is far darker, for instance, than that of the
leading American pragmatist, Richard Rorty, who holds that no idea is truly bad
as long as it leads to other ideas. "Mission Impossible" is the essay in which
Fish's scariest side emerges in clear view. The only thinker who is really
honest about the implausibility of the liberal state, says Fish, is Hobbes:

            

               [B]ecause the equality of right and ability breeds "equality of hope in the
attaining of our Ends," and because each man's ends are naturally to be
preferred to his rival's, the two will inevitably "become enemies," and in the
absence of a neutral arbiter "they will endeavor to destroy or subdue one
another."

            

            And there Fish more or less stops. (Well, actually, he goes on to argue in a
similar fashion against the logical plausibility of free speech, academic
freedom, and blind justice.) Maddeningly, he leads us to the center of the
Hobbesian maze, then refuses to extricate us. If life is a war of all against
all, what guarantee do we have that adhoccery will work, no matter how
inspired? None, of course--at which point Fish generally cackles and says that
since he's a pragmatist, he believes that his ideas about the world are just
that, ideas without consequences. There is, he says, "no straight line from
these propositions to the solution of any real-life problem; they are of no
help and do no work except the non-directing work of telling you that you are
on your own."

            In other words, Fish isn't the unprincipled relativist he's accused of
being. He's something worse. He's a fatalist. But then, so were the
pre-Socratics, several Roman philosophers, and Machiavelli. Culturebox
certainly can't tell you whether Fish is right or wrong. On the other hand,
Fish never claimed to be right. In fact, he once quipped that, now that
objectivity is dead, it is no longer necessary to be right. You just have to be
interesting. Which he is.

         
      
   
