
   
   
      
         
            Department of Offense

            The Los
Angeles Times leads with "an ominous turn" in the Indian Airlines
hijacking: the terrorists' escalation of their demands to a $200 million ransom
and the release, not of the previously reported one Pakistani guerrilla, but of
35. They also want the exhumation and return from India of the body of a dead
comrade. USA
Today leads with a report that because of the general reluctance to fly
this coming New Year's Eve, America's domestic airspace will be nearly
empty--only 45 airliners will be aloft--when the next millennium hits. The
Wall Street Journal front-page business news box
flags its story reporting that in part because of the major airlines' lower
flight volumes, analysts are cutting their earnings estimates. The New York Times ' top non-local story
is Act II of its lead yesterday about an ultra-religious party's possible
defection from Israel's coalition government. Today the Times explains
that Prime Minister Ehud Barak coaxed the party to stay by pledging more
funding for its state-subsidized religious schools. The top non-local story at
the Washington Post is the latest stage of its
presidential candidate psychling tour: Al Gore, Part 6. Save for the
NYT 's fronting of the hijacking, none of the fronts runs anybody else's
top story.

            The WP chronicles Gore's 1969 internal struggle over the military draft. The
paper says he decided to enlist in the Army primarily because he didn't want to
doom his anti-war father's Senate re-election bid and because he wanted to
preserve his own political viability. The story reveals Gore turned down a
relative's offer to get him into the Alabama National Guard.

            The USAT front-page "cover story," upon reviewing some 1,500
personnel decisions made at the Department of Defense, concludes that the
Pentagon regularly grants security clearances to civilian employees of defense
contractor companies who have prior criminal convictions and/or long histories of
financial irresponsibility or substance abuse. Recent grantees include, says
the paper, a convicted murderer, a man convicted of sex offenses against a
minor, and a man who participated in a scheme to defraud the Navy of $2
million.

            The LAT front reports that many Asian-American computer entrepreneurs
in Los Angeles complain that their companies are being unfairly singled out by
the IRS to pay "ozone tax," a levy on items made with ozone-destroying chemicals.
The story says that even though many of these local small shops have been
forced to pay up, some of the region's biggest corporations--Mattel, Sharp
Electronics, and Atlantic Richfield, for instance--have never been
ozone-audited. And, says the paper, Microsoft hasn't either. The story quotes a
Microsoft vice president saying he'd never heard of the ozone tax.

            The papers all go inside with the decision of Seattle's mayor to cancel the
city's planned gala millennium celebration. The main reasons cited: the city's
WTO-inspired unrest and the recent capture at the Canada-Washington border of a
man trying to smuggle in materials for large bombs.

            The NYT and USAT report inside that a man and his wife were
arrested Monday on child abandonment charges after they left their severely
disabled son in a Delaware hospital ER with a note saying they could no longer
afford to care for him. The father, the papers report, is the CEO of a chemical
company. The Times says the company does $500 million in annual sales
while USAT says $380 million.

            The WP editorializes against a provocative new procedure being
implemented by the Fairfax County, Va., police: The department is planning to
hand out cards to crime victims and witnesses advising them that they have the
right to refuse media interviews.

            Today's Papers is refreshed by the periodic unflacked appearance of Lowell
Bergman's byline in the NYT . (He's in the paper today with a workaday
story of an arms dealer's arrest.) After all, Bergman, a contract player at the
Times , is portrayed by Al Pacino in The Insider and a lesser
outfit would have plugged that fact to the (Mira)max.

            Clayton Moore, who played TV's "Lone Ranger" in the '40s and '50s, died
yesterday. It's a measure of boomer media dominance that Moore is given a
lengthy obit at the NYT and a front-page one at the LAT .

         
      
   
