
   
   
      
         
            Linda Tripp Makes Medical History
            

            Does Hollywood love McCain? Let's get one thing straight: Hollywood loves
big grosses, everything else is just a passing fling. America doesn't have to
have a dip in the GDP to consider flaky presidential candidates. At what we
kept being told is the best of times, Warren Beatty and Donald Trump are being
taken semi-seriously. What we flirted with during the depression was far worse.
And maybe our Harvard guys who went to Russia in the early '90s should have
suggested taking the keys to the treasury away from the apparatchiks before the
place was stripped bare.

            OK, I've tried. I've really tried to concentrate on this trivial stuff, but
the real news is--again!--Clinton's women. Monica does a Jenny Craig
commercial, and MSNBC debated this afternoon whether this was damaging to her
dignity. I beg to differ: Her dignity could be damaged only by doing
commercials for a company that sells sinks. Then there's Linda Tripp, if the
New York Post 's reporting of the National Enquirer 's reporting is
to be believed (and why not?), she joins the list of women in Clinton's life
(Gennifer Flowers, Paula Jones) who've gotten cosmetic surgery long after
everyone knows what they look like. Timing, gals, is everything. This is the
first case in American medical history in which cosmetic surgery was reported
to have been caused by John Goodman. What makes America both great and funny is
our stubborn belief in the redeemability of people, which is the flip side of
our disdain for history. "If Monica ever wants to be taken seriously ...," said
a woman from Mademoiselle magazine on MSNBC. Let's start one premise
back: If a woman from Mademoiselle magazine wants to be taken seriously
... No, wait: If MSNBC wants to be taken seriously ... uh oh, I see where this
leads.

            Harry Shearer

            
               Photograph of Boris Yeltsin on the Slate Table of
Contents by Viktor Korotayev/Reuters.
            

         
      
   
