
   
   
      
         
            

            The guest of honor at the
Feb. 2 party was Lanny Davis, President Clinton's outgoing minister of damage
control. The venue was the Holeman Lounge at the National Press Club in
downtown Washington, D.C. And the celebrants included--among
others--investigative reporters from the Washington Post , the Wall
Street Journal , and the Los Angeles Times , all gathered for a final
kiss of the master spinner's ring.

            Why did
the top reporters make merry with Davis for three hours and pay tribute to him
with bawdy toasts? After all, Davis had earned a reputation as one of the
city's most egregious news twisters during Sen. Fred Thompson's
campaign-finance hearings, spinning any reporter who came near that the
hearings' findings were old news. In the early days of the Lewinsky eruption,
Davis provided the same obfuscating service.

            The truth is that we Washington reporters love being
spun--or, to put it bluntly, love being lied to. The underlying reasons are
transparent. If politicians and their mouthpieces gave it to us straight, we'd
have nothing to interpret and write. So we swoon when important people return
our calls. (We've been asked to dance!) We thrill at the telephone game of
question and evasion, thinking our guile and cunning will ultimately yield
truth. We play the tortuous game of spin and leak because we must feed the
deadline beast--that is, serve a new piece of the puzzle to our reading public
every day. So what if some of the pieces are ill-fitting and manufactured from
partial truths?

            There are
few new steps in this dance. In his book on Henry Kissinger, Walter Isaacson
recounts how the diplomat would summon reporters for supposedly intimate
discussions and solicit their opinions. Then he'd feed them junk, which they'd
publish. Lee Atwater was more cynical, deliberately telling reporters things
off the record, knowing that they'd view that information as more credible and
use it.

            
Technically, the Davis party wasn't a
celebration; it was a roast. Davis aide Adam Goldberg booked the room,
purchased appetizers, and conjured the crowd. (At least it was a cash bar.)
Glenn Simpson, an aggressive reporter at the Wall Street Journal , agreed
to lend his name to the party to make it seem like a press-related event. The
invitations were faxed around town, with Simpson as the RSVP contact. Joining
Simpson at the party were a bunch of White House types and about two dozen
journalists, including Susan Schmidt from the Washington Post (herself a
victim of recent White House spinning), Thomas Galvin from the New York
Daily News , and Marc Lacey of the Los Angeles Times .

            Simpson
declines to talk about the party, citing Journal policy. He was anything
but speechless at the party itself, serving as master of ceremonies and
delivering what many thought was a hilarious speech.

            One attendee conceded that the appearances of the Davis
fete are all wrong. "We were treating it almost as a birthday party," the
reporter said, asking for anonymity. "We all wrote a big card and signed it and
thanked him."

            "I wrote on this card if you
come across any news call me," said Lacey. He insisted that such socializing is
a cost of doing business in Washington: "For me it was a sort of
source-development thing." But he added, "You wonder whether it just shows that
folks are too close."

            Lacey's anonymous colleague
spots a parable in the Davis prom: "In this town, you are judged by how well
you can get a story leaked to you, not how well you can develop a story on your
own and connect the dots," she said. "You get stuff leaked to you in the caste
system. You don't have a lot of people out there filing FOIAs or figuring out
some path that hasn't been walked before."

            But
reporters don't need artful seducers like Davis to make news. One of my
colleagues who worked for the New York Times ' Washington bureau during
Watergate says that getting your calls returned by official sources like Davis
is a false, overvalued currency. You claw your way into a position to get your
calls returned by actually breaking stories, but that reward is empty. It means
that you're the seventh or eighth on the call list to be lied to, instead of
the 25 th .

            
Although Davis has officially retired from the
game, he's still mixing sense and nonsense for public consumption. Just two
weeks ago, I watched him on Rivera Live spin the nation on the subject
of the president and Monica Lewinsky's relationship.

            "She was not like 800
interns," Davis said. "She had come to know Betty Currie very well. She had
come to know the president, through proximity and through being around that
office, very well. The president and Betty Currie had some concern about
her.

            "I know that most interns
don't get a chance to know Betty Currie and don't have the many contacts that
Monica Lewinsky had with the president. ... It certainly was a fact that Monica
Lewinsky, by her own intentions, as a matter of public record, spent a lot of
time around the Oval Office getting to know [Betty Currie] and the
president.

            "As a
matter of fact, I would agree that it is unusual to have that kind of access
and relationship with the president's personal secretary and the president
himself and his friend, Vernon Jordan. Yes, factually, it's unusual."

            Icalled Davis to ask about the foundation of his statements
and what he could add to them. Actually, you can't call Davis. You page him and
he, joy of joys, returns your call.

            Davis denied any firsthand
knowledge of the Lewinsky affair, claiming that he was merely spewing back what
he had read in published reports.

            "I was making a statistical
comment out of all the interns that work in the White House," he said. "I can't
characterize the relationship between her and the president. ... I used the
word 'unusual' as a statistical comment."

            But you didn't qualify your
remarks on television, I said.

            "When you are on television,
you have to respond quickly," Davis explained.

            Now I understood.

            "If you write anything, you
should know that I have no personal knowledge whatsoever about anything."

            Thanks, Lanny, here's to
you.

         
      
   
