
   
   
      
         
            

            The Nobel Prize in economics
was recently awarded to Myron Scholes and Robert Merton. Their work has had
tremendous practical impact on the world of finance. Yet their own lives call
into question a key assumption of economic theory.

            The issue is simple. One day
in 1970, three hard-working associate professors of finance scribbled down a
few equations on a blackboard, and eureka! They had discovered a method for
pricing options. (The third man, Fischer Black, died in 1995.) What did they do
with this extremely valuable information? They gave it to the rest of us for
free. That is the problem.

            The
assumption that appears to be in jeopardy is profit maximization. In markets,
particularly financial markets, when profit opportunities arise, it is assumed
that savvy individuals will take advantage of them in order to capture profits.
Some economists describe it this way: No one leaves $500 bills lying on the
street. Indeed in finance theory--including the Nobel prize winners' own
formula--the profit motive is the engine that moves financial markets from one
equilibrium to another. (Equilibrium being the place where nothing really
happens.)

            Modern financial theory is highly dependent on such strange
theoretical beings--greedy fortunetellers who can compute the third derivative
of their utility function. For example, the creatures assumed in the Capital
Asset Pricing Model, the keystone of most academic finance, are assumed to care
only about risk and return. The people trapped in the CAPM are assumed to apply
the equations provided by Sharpe, Lintner, and Treynor (for which only Sharpe
won a Nobel) to pounce on the slightest deviation from equilibrium in order to
get more . This greed is their most important trait. If they aren't
greedy, the theory falls apart, as would most other economic theories.
Professors Merton and Scholes have undoubtedly assumed unbridled greed hundreds
of times in classrooms, academic conferences, and cocktail parties. The
question at hand is whether our generous academics were greedy enough to be
consistent with their own assumptions.

            On that day in 1970, they
surely knew that they had discovered something of great value. Why didn't they
take their solution and their measly academic salaries and start trading
options? With the formula programmed into only their calculators, they
could have ruled the emerging Chicago Board of Options Exchange, taking the
money of the hapless traders who were still pricing based on history, rules of
thumb, or their guts (a potentially substantial source of wisdom here in
Chicago). There is no way to know how much money they would have made, but it
surely would dwarf the million bucks they scored for the Nobel. They had the
key equation that now drives hundreds of billions, if not trillions, of dollars
of annual trading volume in stock options, futures options, mortgages,
over-the-counter currency options, and most of the derivatives industry.

            To be
sure, these guys have made a lot of money working for Wall Street firms in
recent years. They surely have been adequately greedy in the rest of their
careers to satisfy their own assumptions. But their youthful charitable lapse
must still be explained.

            
One possible explanation is that if they had
kept the formula to themselves, the budding options market would have been
stunted. They would have quickly taken all the money from the suckers trading
against them, and no one would have been foolish enough to take them on.
Perhaps they actually have maximized their income by settling for a tiny piece
of the huge pie that their formula created? This explanation ignores the
underlying premise of the financial markets: There's a sucker born every
minute. The market might not have grown as big if they had hoarded their
secret, but they would have been able to dominate it.

            Another explanation is that
they may have feared some other finance professor would ruin their monopoly.
There usually is a pathetic close second for any theoretical breakthrough in
academia. That's the nature of the idea market. Someone else eventually would
have stumbled onto the same formula. In which case they would have had to cut
the spoiler in for half. Or even worse, the spoiler might have given the
formula away, leaving our laureates with neither fame nor fortune. Any claims
that they actually discovered it first, but kept it to themselves, would have
been met with skepticism at the faculty club.

             

            This leads us to a third possibility: They couldn't trust
each other. Perhaps The Treasure of the Sierra Madre was showing in
Cambridge that weekend and each economist realized that he would always have to
worry about the other two guys. As any 10-year-old knows (and game theorists
can now elaborately prove), three-person secrets are particularly troublesome
in this regard, because nobody can ever pinpoint which of the other two might
have cheated. Thus, they may have opted for full, public disclosure because
they knew that that was the only way to ensure that they shared equally in the
spoils. (In the end, they didn't share equally, though. Scholes got his name on
the formula and the Nobel, Black only got his name on the formula, and Merton
only got the Nobel.)

            Here's a
thought: Maybe Black, Scholes, and Merton were interested in serving the public
good, and the giveaway was strictly for the betterment of humanity! Before the
guffaws start, we should at least consider this alternative. The formula was
most directly a gift to the options traders around the world, which is not a
group that usually inspires charitable acts. So these three weren't in the same
league with Mother Teresa. Scholes and Merton reportedly are applauded when
they appear on the floor of the options exchange, which shows that options
traders are at least appreciative, if not deserving, of the rare charities that
they receive. However, the benefits of this formula do extend beyond the pits.
The efficient and accurate pricing of options has helped to make the economy
more efficient. So we all have benefited indirectly.

            
Another alternative is that our heroes were
pursuing the noble goal of academics everywhere--tenure. Certainly tenure was
in the bag for these fellows after coming up with the formula, though it
probably was likely for them anyway. Or, if not tenure, their goal might have
been the eternal fame associated with having your name on an important piece of
human wisdom. Economists are as guilty of this hubris as are members of any
discipline: There's the Fischer Effect, the Sharpe Ratio, the Miller-Modigliani
Theorem, Tobin's Q, the Laffer Curve (the only one in which the name helps
characterize the discovery), and the greatest of them all, Pareto Optimality.
Of these bits of academic immortality, Black-Scholes is probably the most
widely used by nonacademics, so they have made a good buy on the formula's fame
value.

            The first three explanations
all rely on various forms of greed or other base human motivations that are
close enough to greed to be easily worked into economic theory. The last three
motives--public good, tenure, and fame--don't fit as well with the basic
assumptions of economics. It is possible to fit them in by the economist's
magic trick of defining any behavior as maximizing something called "utility,"
utility being defined as whatever you choose to maximize. But plain old greed
should be adequate to explain nearly everything in finance, because finance is
about making money. If the behavior of people who are in the profession of
making money isn't well explained by the motivation of making money, then it
seems a real stretch to apply it elsewhere--for example, to nurses.

            For straight cash greed, our
Nobel laureates fall woefully short of their own standard. Someday a Nobel may
go to theoreticians in behavioral finance who will be able to build a model
that explains their own behavior as well as it does that of others.

         
      
   
