
   
   
      
         
            Can Newt Gingrich Save Social Security?

            House Speaker Newt Gingrich
has been gently tapping the "third rail" of American politics--Social Security
reform--to see if the electricity it generates is truly lethal. Earlier this
year, Gingrich impressed a group of journalists at the World Economic Forum in
Davos, Switzerland, with a disciplined description of his thoughts on the
subject. At the time, the speaker's remarks were "off the record." That he has
now agreed to let them be reported may be due in part to the cover provided by
two Democratic senators, Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York and Robert Kerrey
of Nebraska, who have unveiled a Social Security plan that is, in certain ways,
more radical and less socially conscious than what the speaker seems to have in
mind.

            
Gingrich's approach will not placate die-hard defenders of the current system,
who are already up in arms about the Moynihan plan. Nor will it satisfy fire
breathing "privatizers" who would dump the whole thing and set every wage
earner free to make a killing on Wall Street. But the speaker, like Moynihan
and Kerrey, would start to move some of Social Security's current surpluses
into private sector investments. He would do it by setting up "Social
Security-plus" accounts for each participant. These could be invested in a
"broad based" portfolio of private securities with low risk but a higher rate
of return than government bonds.

            The basic idea is not new. Last year, for example, all 13
members of the Social Security Advisory Council agreed that some part of the
trust funds should be invested in the private market (though they didn't agree
on how). The reason is simple: The Social Security system is missing out on its
own "golden years"--the one period in the program's lifetime when it should be
possible both to keep paying benefits to current retirees and to make prudent
provision for future claimants.

            That's
because, over the last several years and for several to come, Social Security
payroll taxes have far exceeded, and will continue to far exceed, the benefits
paid out. Those surpluses, totaling more than $1 trillion by the end of this
decade, are supposed to be "invested" against the rainy day when the baby
boomers retire. Instead, they are simply transferred to the Treasury in
exchange for IOUs (plus IOUs for interest on past loans). The money is then
used to help cover the costs of everything from Black Hawk helicopters to White
House spinners. Social Security is thus doing the rest of the budget--and --a
huge favor since, without its loans, the much touted budget surplus would be a
triple-digit deficit.

            
This is like replacing the money you'd been
saving for your kids' college tuition with an IO-me note, buying a new car, and
then congratulating yourself on your financial prudence. But in the case of
Social Security there's an added problem: A payroll tax is a lousy way to pay
for most of what government buys. It's fair enough to use such a tax to pay for
a social insurance program that provides coverage in rough proportion to
contributions. This is especially so since Social Security's retirement and
disability benefit formulas are heavily weighted to favor low earners. But
there's no justification for paying for defense or environmental protection or
the weather bureau with a regressive tax that hits only the lower part of
earnings and hits investment income not at all. (Well, there is one
justification: Otherwise, Congress and the president would have to cut
spending, raise taxes, or just admit they can't come close to balancing the
budget.)

            In their
plan, Moynihan and Kerrey would address this inequity by cutting payroll taxes
by some $800 billion over the next decade, thus eliminating the trust fund
surplus. To keep the deficit in the rest of the budget from being laid bare for
all to ogle, they propose both tax hikes and benefit cuts. (Click for a
summary.) Some savings would come from higher income and payroll taxes,
especially on well-off workers and retirees. (Expect a hue and cry to be raised
among tax cut advocates against the plan's provisions calling for smaller
inflation adjustments in the income tax code.) But much would come in the form
of reduced Social Security benefits, notably accelerated increases in the
retirement age and a one-percentage-point cut in annual cost-of-living benefit
adjustments. Most economists do agree that the Consumer Price Index
significantly overstates inflation, and the system currently adjusts retirees'
initial benefits for real economic growth as well as for inflation. But the
senators' cut is toward the high end of the consensus, especially if sustained
long into the future.

            How plausible are these proposals? A truly honest reform
would force the general budget to pay for itself and let Social Security
reserve its past as well as its future surpluses for the system's next-century
needs. But the senators would soften the benefit cuts by offering workers a
shot at higher private sector returns. Beginning in 2001, workers could take
the full two-percentage-point cut in payroll taxes they propose, including the
employer share, and invest the money in personal savings accounts. (Otherwise
workers can pocket their own half of the payroll tax cut.) That would make
Social Security look much like the current government employee retirement
plan--and many private sector plans--in which a fixed benefit pension is
supplemented by a savings plan in which worker contributions are matched by
employer contributions up to certain limits.

            The
trouble with this, as former Social Security Commissioner Robert Ball points
out, is that making the savings accounts voluntary means that many lower-wage
workers will surely choose not to participate. Moreover, if workers are allowed
a wide range of investment choices, then administrative costs, error rates--and
risk--will soar. And even if investments are limited to a relatively small menu
of government-supervised options, the timing of their contributions or
retirement will disadvantage some workers. In case you've forgotten, the stock
market doesn't always go up.

            
Gingrich, however, addresses these concerns, if
only in general terms. At Davos he said he didn't even want to use the loaded
term "privatization." A basic social insurance system is a hallmark of a
civilized society, he said, and it must be government-run and mandatory.
Otherwise, for reasons laudable or frivolous, many people won't save the money
needed to provide for their old age or unexpected disability, and society will
end up paying to keep them on welfare. Nor should any current retirees fear for
their benefits, especially at a time when the system is generating huge
surpluses that ought to be reserved for the system's future needs. "No one has
to worry. No one should get scared."

            Still, as
traditionalists such as Ball acknowledge, private investments--even the
broad-based, relatively conservative portfolios selected by insurance companies
and banks--do offer significantly better returns than government bonds. The
National Bureau of Economic Research estimates that stocks outpace Treasury
securities by a range of 3 percent to 13 percent a year. Even the lower limit
of that differential compounds to a hefty sum over time. Moreover, redirecting
trust fund surpluses into the private market (which is what the Moynihan-Kerrey
plan essentially does) has one large potential advantage--when the time comes
to redeem the securities, the money should really be there.

            And that's the key point. The incremental reforms that
traditionalists favor to put the system's books in long-term balance all assume
that the current trust fund balances, held in the form of Treasury bonds, are
really being compounded and preserved. But when the time comes to redeem the
bonds (or even when the annual payroll tax surpluses begin to taper off several
years from now), the government will be forced to choose among ugly
alternatives. It will have to cut other spending, raise other taxes or, more
likely, sell other bonds to the public--that is, run a big budget deficit.
Social Security itself wouldn't go bankrupt. As long as there are still U.S.
workers paying payroll taxes (and if there aren't, we'll have many far bigger
problems), these can cover at least partial benefits. But the pressure to cut
benefits or sharply raise payroll taxes would be enormous.

            Moynihan
has long been a stalwart advocate of traditional social insurance. By his
abrupt switch to the side of relatively radical reform, the senator has opened
up a gap in the middle of the debate. In a further role reversal, Gingrich may
have positioned himself to fill it.

            
               If you missed our previous
links to 1) President's Clinton's vacuous Social Security promise and 2) a
summary of the very real tax hikes and benefit cuts proposed by Moynihan and
Kerrey, click and .
            

         
      
   
