
   
   
      
         
            Act II

            By Matt
Miller

            
               (posted Tuesday, March
24)
            

            
               The living room of
Monica Lewinsky's apartment at the Watergate. A visibly distraught Monica
paces. She picks up Time and Newsweek , which feature Kathleen
Willey on the cover, from a coffee table. She looks at the magazines for a
moment, then throws them to the floor with a shriek. She goes to the bar, puts
three ice cubes in a glass, pours a drink, lights a cigarette. She walks to the
window and pulls back the drawn curtain to peek out. The door opens, and
William Ginsburg enters. He drops his briefcase and removes his coat,
exhausted.
            

            
               ML: Where've you
been? You've been gone all f**king day.

            
               WG: They wouldn't
let me leave. There were eight of them. The only call they let me make was to
your mother. She'll be here on the next train.

            
               ML: What's their
bottom line?

            
               WG: It's not
pretty. They say we have no choice--we either take a one hour special and call
it a day, or they walk. No book tie-in, no movie of the week, no cable, no
foreign rights.

            
               ML: No foreign?
Look, if you think I'm going to sit here while Kathleen f**king Willey walks
off with this scandal, you're mistaken. I made this thing. I wiggled my
buns for a year to get those pizzas into the Oval, and she thinks she can waltz
in with this [mock whine] "He put my hand there " crap? Have you
seen how many times they've played that clip today? I told you we'd strung them
out too long. I want Diane Sawyer down here now . I want Ted f**king
Koppel doing a town hall meeting with me on a stool. I'll let Katie stay the
night to do an exclusive on "prisoner at the Watergate." No-- [she
smiles] --make that Matt Lauer ...

            
               WG: They don't
think ABC or NBC will play. After the Willey thing, you're starting to look
like a rerun. Plus, Rather's already spreading the word that everybody gets
those presidential trinkets when he comes back from trips.

            
               ML: Think. We've
got to think.

            
               WG: There is one
shot. Bryant said if we back off the affidavit he could see a series. Maybe.
You know, 37 Visits , or something. One week, you're the only one he can
turn to when Newt shuts down the government; the next, you're bucking him up
for Saddam. If it hits, there's a big syndication upside.

            
               ML: What's the
downside?

            
               WG: Pretty serious
perjury time [looks at his watch]. Why don't you refresh your
recollection for a while, and we'll talk when I'm back.

            
               ML: Where are you
off to?

            
               WG: 
               [Putting his
coat on] I've got drinks with Larry and Wolf, and then dinner with Barbara
at Morton's. Sam may stop by with Peter and Ted, and Roger Ailes wants to talk
about this idea for a legal show that ... [catches himself; she turns
away] . Monica, it's business. I left the Chinese menu on the counter.

            
               ML: I'm sick of
f**king Chinese.

            
               WG: Then go
out.

            
               ML: Are you
kidding? I'll be mobbed.

            
               WG: No you won't.
There's no one out there.

            
               ML: What do you
mean, there's no one out there?

            
               WG: They're all off
staking out Kathleen in Richmond. Guccione just offered her 3 mil for a
nude.

            
               ML: Three mil? I
thought he offered me 2 mil.

            
               WG: Have you seen
her legs? For 51, they're pretty damned good. Not that my opinion is important
here. [Monica flings herself on the couch, bursts into tears.] Monica,
baby, I kissed those little polkas when you were 3 weeks old. Let's face
it--they're not so little anymore. And the nets like the idea of a peer for
Clinton--it's safer, more like a soap, less like Lolita . What can I say,
kiddo? Those are the breaks. But a one hour special ain't bad for a kid who got
her start licking stamps in the mail room ...

            
               [Ginsburg heads toward
door, humming "I Got the World on a String." He pauses to fix his bow tie in
the mirror. Monica pulls out a gun from under the couch.]
            

            
               ML: 
               [In a
trance] Where will I go? What will I do?

            
               WG: 
               [Over his
shoulder] Sweetie, don't sweat it. You drop a few pounds, you're a shoe-in
when Weight Watchers goes looking for a new Fergie. And aren't they bringing
back Hollywood 
               Squares ? [Monica assumes the classic FBI firing
position.] Listen, if Lehrer calls, just tell him he can get me [he
turns to face her] ... on the cell phone. Monica!

            
               ML: Creep!

            
               [Blackout]
            

            
               [Shot rings
out]
            

            
               [Curtain]
            

         
      
   
