
   
   
      
         
            Tax Shelters: The Video Game

             

            
               NOTE: This article
includes two live spreadsheets where you can plug in your own numbers. Click to
go directly to a or a .
            

            As part of the 1997 Balanced
Budget Act, Congress and President Clinton cut the top tax rate on capital
gains to 20 percent. Capital gains are profits on the sale of investments such
as stocks and real estate. Tax rates on ordinary income go up to 39.6 percent.
Further reductions in the capital-gains rate are scheduled for future
years.

            Enthusiasts of the
capital-gains tax break believe it will help the economy by stimulating savings
and investment. That is debatable. (See a 
                  Slate
                article arguing
otherwise; also see this 
                  Slate
                "Dialogue" on the
subject.) But one form of investment this new law undoubtedly will stimulate is
tax shelters. Shelters are financial arrangements designed primarily or
entirely to reduce taxes. They were largely eliminated by the 1986 tax reform,
which ended the special break for capital gains. Now they are back, as the
following examples demonstrate.

            What is wrong with tax
shelters? Leave aside critical questions of fairness and revenue lost to the
Treasury (which must be made up by borrowing or by increasing taxes on other
people). Consider only the effect of tax shelters on the overall economy.
Shelters hurt the economy in two ways. At best they waste resources on lawyers
and accountants designing complicated but economically meaningless
arrangements. At worst they redirect investment capital from uses that make
economic sense to those that don't. In the early 1980s, for example, the tax
system made it profitable to build office buildings even if you had no hope of
renting them out. The result was downtowns full of "see through" towers, and a
real-estate glut from which some cities are still recovering.

            How does a tax shelter work?
.

         
      
   
