
   
   
      
         
            Anonymous Gifts From Individuals, 1997

            1. $30 million to
the UNIVERSITY OF ST. THOMAS (Minn.) for the Graduate School of Business from a
Minneapolis/St. Paul-area family. The gift is believed to be the largest ever
given to a college or university in Minnesota. The family boosted an earlier
$10-million pledge, "because it feels strongly that there never has been a
greater need for management education based on values and ethics." The gift
will allow the school to endow as many as 10 new professorships and to create a
$2-million scholarship fund that will assist minorities and students attending
a Spirituality of Management seminar at the university.

            2. $27.4 million to
the HOSPITAL SISTERS OF ST. FRANCIS FOUNDATION (Springfield, Ill.) to help pay
for the new Women and Children's Center at St. John's Hospital. The gift was
from a donor who wished to remain anonymous, said Sister Bernadine Gutowski,
spiritual leader of the Hospital Sisters of the Third Order of St. Francis in
the United States. "The donor required us to sign an agreement on the part of
the hospital to keep the donor's identity anonymous," she said. "But it's fair
to say the money came from someone who identified with our values and
mission."

            3. $25 million to
the UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS Southwestern Medical Center from an anonymous couple as
a dollar-for-dollar challenge to endow a $50-million scholars program in
medical research.

            3. $25 million to
MISSISSIPPI COLLEGE in Clinton for the "New Dawn" capital campaign. The gift is
unrestricted but must be matched by other donors over the next three to five
years.

            5. $15 million to
STEWARD SCHOOL (Henrico County, Va.) "Christmas in September," said Jennifer
Sgro, who works in the school's development office. Whoever the donors may be,
they have ushered in a new era at the small school, said H. Gerald Quigg, a
fund-raising consultant to the school. The donors attached only three
stipulations to the gift. First: The school must stick to its goal of providing
a high-quality preparatory education. Second: One-third of the gift is to be
earmarked for a fine-arts center to be named in honor of Paul R. Cramer, the
school's headmaster for 19 years who retired in 1994. Last: One-third must be
used for the school's endowment.

            6. $10 million to
MARQUETTE UNIVERSITY (Milwaukee) from an alumnus and his family for a new
library that will be named after Father John Raynor, the university president
who died in November 1997. The amount was proffered as a challenge gift, and
the donor has required the university to seek additional donations to match the
original figure. The gift is among the largest ever received by Marquette.

            6. $10 million to
CENTENARY COLLEGE (Shreveport, La.), for unrestricted use. The college's
trustees have voted to designate the gift as a dollar-for-dollar matching fund
to invite additional donations to the capital campaign. "Thus we intend to
transform this $10 million into at least $20 million," Centenary College
President Kenneth L. Schwab said.

            6. $10 million in
cash to MARY BALDWIN COLLEGE (Staunton, Va.) This is the largest cash gift
received by Mary Baldwin and among the largest given to a women's college. This
gift is unusual not only in its size but also in its purpose, which is to fund
several one-time projects. Founded in 1842, Mary Baldwin is the oldest women's
college affiliated with the Presbyterian Church of the United States.

            6. $10 million to
MARS HILL COLLEGE (N.C.) for development of a school of business and community
science. The pledge is the largest single gift in the college's history. The
donors, one of whom has long-standing ties to Mars Hill, based their decision
to make the pledge primarily on the quality of leadership now at the college.
"We are deeply humbled by the generosity of these wonderful people," said
Chancellor Max Lennon.

         
      
   
