
   
   
      
         
            Skipgate

            The objet de
controversy: Franklin Foer's assessment, "Henry Louis Gates Jr.: The
Academic as Entrepreneur."

            Henry Louis Gates
objects.

            Franklin Foer
replies.

            The
editor triangulates.

            
               Henry Louis Gates Objects
            

            During the Soviet era, a
series of jokes circulated in the Armenian Republic reflecting upon the
accuracy of the local radio authority. "Is it true, as reported, that Belemjian
won 2 million drams from a municipal lottery?" a caller asks his local station.
"Absolutely true," the radio announcer replies. "Except it wasn't a lottery but
a poker game. And it wasn't 2 million drams but two drams. And he didn't win
it, he lost it." Franklin Foer's "Henry Louis Gates
Jr.: The Academic as Entrepreneur" is nice about my own work, but it gets
so many things wrong that it makes me feel for poor Belemjian. A few
highlights:

            My
vitae lists the advisory committees and editorial boards I've
participated in since 1976. I didn't serve on 29 journal boards and 82 advisory
committees over the course of one year, as 
                  Slate
                suggests, but
over the course of some 22 years. (For that matter, the Black Periodical
Literature Project concluded in 1996; the African-American Women Writers,
1910-1940 series concluded in 1995.)

            I'm said to be the only academic with his own "chief of
staff." This turns out to refer to the assistant director of the W.E.B. Du Bois
Institute. (I'm its director.) Does 
                  Slate
                think I'm the only
administrator with an administrative deputy or associate?

            Then I'm
said to have one assistant to edit my writing and another whose job it is to
conduct journalistic research. Who are these people? And why haven't they ever
reported to work? In fact, I have one research assistant, who is working on the
African documentary. Sadly, the life of Reilly 
                  Slate
                evokes is no
life of mine.

            
Ihad a hard time recognizing the encyclopedia
project from 
                  Slate
               's account. For example, it says that I'd
discovered that a third of the early entries written by staff researchers had
ripped off other reference works. Needless to say, one such entry would be
unacceptable, and we've adopted strict safeguards to prevent any such problems.
But even in that early batch, the proportion of tainted entries wasn't a third;
it was 2.5 percent. (All were immediately corrected or jettisoned.) In any
case, offering an assessment of an encyclopedia without having read it is like
assessing an issue of 
                  Slate
                that hasn't been posted.

            An
encyclopedia--like a magazine and unlike a novel--is a collaborative venture,
and it depends upon the skills and competencies of a community of learning.
Global Culture represented the combined efforts of many people, and they
are all acknowledged by name in the book. (By contrast, 
                  Slate
               's
assessment relies entirely upon sources who are not identified by name.) I can
be justly reproached for any careless errors that made it into print, but not
for the collaborative nature of the enterprise. 
                  Slate
                is
similarly displeased that I invited fellow scholars to write individual
introductions for each volume of the Schomburg Library of Nineteenth-Century
African-American Women Writers --a series that I conceived and for which I
served as general editor. Their names appear on the title pages.

                  Slate
               's general implication is that I capitalize on the
uncredited labors of others. I'm confused. Who are these uncredited
laborers?

            
               Slate 's most damning exhibit is the Norton Anthology
of African-American Literature , a project to which I've devoted a great
deal of time and energy over a decade. Ten section editors helped put the
anthology together. But, 
                  Slate
                protests, "it was [Gates'] byline
that appeared on the cover." Yes, my name appears on the cover. So does that of
my fellow general editor, Nelly MacKay. And so do those of 10 ten section
editors. Is there a problem here?

            
               --Henry
Louis Gates Jr.
            

            Cambridge, Mass.Back

            
               Franklin Foer's Reply
            

            To take
Professor Gates' objections one at a time:

            His vitae lists many
advisory boards and committees. Some include termination dates; most do not.
Professor Gates may not have intended to give the impression that he still
serves on boards in the second category, but that is hardly an unreasonable
conclusion to have reached. Obviously, when his vitae says he no longer
serves on a board, I didn't include it in my tally.

            Peter Glenshaw may have as
his official title "assistant director of the W.E.B. Du Bois Institute." But
Glenshaw refers to himself as "Henry Louis Gates Jr.'s chief of staff." I know
of no other academic whose assistant assumes this title.

            Gates denies the existence
of assistants. I hope it will refresh his memory if I remind him of Michael
Vazquez and the Du Bois Institute work-study student. Granted they do not work
full time on the projects I described in my article, but I don't think Gates
will deny they perform these tasks.

            For the article, Gates asked
not to be quoted about the Encyclopedia because of a nondisclosure
agreement with Microsoft. In our conversation, he said he didn't have a precise
figure on the percentage of plagiarized entries. (I wish he had provided this
2.5 percent figure to me.) But he conceded that the number of entries
plagiarized had been "substantial." Three others I spoke with who were
intimately involved in producing the first batch of entries confirmed the
percentage I cited.

            Gates
says that he credits others' labor on many projects. Clearly, he is right. But
because of his celebrity and organizational acumen, he is the one who always
seems to get top billing--or one of the top billings--touting his involvement
in these collaborative efforts. This is merely an observation, not an
accusation.

            Finally,
I would like to make clear that, in two hourlong conversations, I gave Gates
the opportunity to confirm or deny nearly every matter of fact in this article.
Back

            
               The Editor Triangulates
            

            Skip Gates
has admirably resisted getting sucked into the fuss over the headline Boston
Magazine put on its current profile of him ("Head Negro in Charge"). Yet he
is overwrought about our piece in 
                  Slate
               . If you gather from his
letter that the 
                  Slate
                assessment was a hatchet job, check it out. Not
only was it admiring in many ways, but many of the specific points to which he
responds don't even amount to criticism. Nevertheless, we want to get things
right and be as fair as possible. So here (after a phone conversation) are some
further comments and clarifications:

            1. The CV on which Gates says
no one could possibly suppose he was trying to imply he is currently on those
boards: We accept that he was not trying to imply this, but you wouldn't be
insane to infer it--especially given that some boards do list a leaving
date.

            2. The
"chief of staff": Not only did Glenshaw identify himself to Franklin Foer as
the chief of staff, but others confirmed Glenshaw often refers to himself that
way. Gates objects that the article describes him as "an academic" with a chief
of staff, but it is not "as an academic" that he is assisted by Glenshaw. We
are happy to note that distinction, which readers may weigh for themselves.

            3. The
assistants: Gates says no assistant edits his work. Someone who works with
Gates claims to regularly "tweak" his writings. Whether "tweaking" equals
"editing" is, once again, up to you. Gates denies using any work-study students
for research help. Foer says three people with reason to know said otherwise.
Foer concedes he didn't confirm this with Gates himself but notes it seemed
utterly uncontroversial. And indeed, the piece did not suggest there was
anything unusual or wrong with using editors, tweakers, or graduate students.
Which there isn't.

            4. Gates'
denial that he ever uses others to dig up quotes for his articles: Someone says
that he has served Gates in this way. The editor of 
                  Slate
                has
often asked others to track down a quote, sees nothing wrong with it (as long
as you ask politely), and doesn't believe the article suggested there was
anything wrong with it.

            5The Encyclopedia : Foer did not say Gates had said a
third of the early entries were plagiarized. He said others had said so.
Naturally these others insisted on not being identified, but there are three of
them--all in a position to know. Gates denies it. Someone is fibbing. Do three
anonymous sources with unknown biases outweigh one obviously interested but
named party? This is the classic news consumer's dilemma, and we leave you to
it.

            6. The
Norton Anthology : The article implies that only Gates' name appears on the
cover. Gates asserts all 11 editors' names are on the cover. Gates' name and
one other appear on the front cover. All 11 appear on the spine. The author
checked the cover on Amazon.com, which only reproduces the front cover. That's
not an excuse--just an explanation. Anyway, we apologize wholeheartedly for
implying that Gates' co-general editor is not on the front cover and
halfheartedly for implying that all 11 aren't on the spine.

            
7The general issue of crediting the work of
others: Gates objects most strongly to the assertion that "there is something
dishonest about marketing under Gates' signature work that is produced mainly
by his assistants." Whether that is a fair conclusion to draw from the evidence
is something the reader, once again, can decide. We merely note that a) the
article does present evidence, not just the naked assertion quoted here; b) the
piece also has many positive things to say, not just about Skip Gates and his
scholarship in general but specifically about his mass-production technique; c)
in context, the complaint is about general academic practice, with Gates as a
prime example, as much as it is a specific criticism of Gates himself.

            8. Finally, Gates' complaint
that Foer did not give him a chance to answer various points made in the piece:
Foer notes that he discussed these general issues with Gates for two hours. If
there are specific points in the piece he failed to give Gates the opportunity
to challenge, he should have, and he and 
                  Slate
                apologize. We are
happy to have given him that opportunity now.Back

         
      
   
