
   
   
      
         
            Is Clinton a Sex Addict?

            Bill Clinton, our most adept
practitioner of therapeutic politics, has always flirted with dysfunction. Six
years ago, during his first successful presidential campaign, he discussed his
dysfunctional family history during a televised interview. He acknowledged that
growing up with an alcoholic parent may have made him particularly eager to
please and placate. Veterans of the recovery movement, which remained popular
in the early 1990s, would have instantly recognized Clinton as an ACOA (adult
child of an alcoholic). Considering his abusive, alcoholic stepfather, his
substance abusing brother, his mother's penchant for gambling, and his own
compulsive eating and alleged womanizing, Clinton's family looked like a case
study in a codependency book.

            Whether you saw this as a
weakness or a strength depended on your relationship with the therapeutic
culture. "Real men don't get on the couch," a spokesperson for President Bush
told the New York Times , standing up for the American tradition of
rugged individualism. But for the millions of Americans who considered
themselves survivors of dysfunction and abuse and believed fervently in the
healing power of the couch or their support groups, Clinton's implied awareness
of his "feeling reality" was much more appealing than any display of machismo.
Being "in recovery" is no weakness to people who consider being "in denial" the
only alternative.

            Besides,
Clinton never actually presented himself as truly dysfunctional. (Who would
elect a dysfunctional president?) Instead, his moments of apparent
introspection humanized him and made him seem approachable. They helped him
politically just as Princess Diana's bouts of bulimia helped transform her into
"the people's princess."

            Clinton's desire to please was a classic symptom of
codependency, but those who recognized it as such probably felt closer to him
when he acknowledged it. People who were not conversant in the language of
recovery might see in his desire to please a talent for compromise--an
essential political art. As a candidate, Clinton deftly balanced hints of
codependency with the image of a leader in control of policy and the political
process. If he could not always control his appetites--for cheeseburgers and
doughnuts--he was someone voters could identify with. But his unmistakable
intelligence, his ability to master the details of complicated policy matters,
and his skills at communicating made him someone voters could also admire.

            The most powerful
charismatics are those who simultaneously invite identification and awe. (And
even Clinton's opponents are awestruck by his seduction and survival skills.)
Charismatic personalities combine transcendent beauty, glamour, or talent with
accessibility, providing a way in for people eager to identify with a higher
being. They seem both ineffable and utterly familiar.

            But this
delicate balance of minor, private, victimless dysfunction and the ability to
master public issues and events has been endangered by the current scandals.
Clinton's image as a "caring" leader, one who will help us heal, has been badly
damaged by Kathleen Willey's story, which has put his very membership in the
therapeutic culture at risk. The president who ran on a platform of compassion
allegedly acted cruelly to someone who came to him in need of it. If Willey's
story is true, he didn't feel her pain. He used it.

            
People steeped in popular therapies seek
explanations. "Is the president a sex addict?" some wondered when the Lewinsky
story broke. In the aftermath of Willey's 60 Minutes interview, the
conversation has revived. According to Time , Clinton's old friend and
reputed former lover Dolly Kyle Browning claims that, in 1987, she confronted
him with her suspicions that he was a sex addict, "just like her." According to
Browning, Time reports, the president broke down and cried. Whether or
not this sensational story is true, it suggests Clinton is in danger of being
defeated by the therapeutic culture that helped get him elected.

            The
recovery movement gave us the concept of sex addiction, which is a form of
codependency. In the 1980s, the movement popularized the notion that behaviors
could be as addictive as substances such as cocaine or alcohol, and it founded
12-step programs for compulsive shoppers, gamblers, sexaholics, and so on.
Recovery enthusiasts would probably be sympathetic to a sex-addicted president,
but might be unlikely to support him until he agreed to get help--which is hard
to imagine.

            To people who are most familiar with the term and most
likely to take it seriously, if Clinton is a sex addict, he is clearly not in
recovery. Therefore he is in denial. To recovery aficionados, that probably
means he is not sufficiently evolved, spiritually or psychically, to lead the
nation. They would not expect the president to be devoid of dysfunction, but
would expect him to have recognized and vanquished his own abusive behaviors.
To support him would be to support his denials, thereby making them
"enablers."

            There is
some symmetry in the diagnosis of Clinton, our therapeutic president, as
patient in addition to healer. The personal development tradition greatly
values the presumed authority of experience, and codependency experts--leaders
such as John Bradshaw--routinely confessed their own struggles with various
addictions in order to bolster their credibility. But they marketed themselves
as people who had been through the "process" of recovery, surrendered their
will to their higher powers, and freed themselves of addictive behaviors. From
this perspective, Clinton has yet to get with the program.

            
For people who are not immersed in recovery but
are receptive to the notion of sex addiction, the president's dysfunction
simply means that, like Ken Starr, he is "out of control." Nobody wants an out
of control president. Meanwhile, people hostile to popular notions of addiction
will dismiss the characterization of Clinton as a sex addict as an evasion of
personal responsibility. (And, indeed, some of his supporters may prefer seeing
him as the victim of a disease rather than as an intentional sexual
predator.)

            But let's get clinical: Does
the diagnosis of sex addiction make sense? Outside the world of pop psychology,
it is likely to engender skepticism. The American Psychiatric Association does
not formally recognize sex addiction as a mental disorder. Among experts who
treat and study compulsive behaviors and chemical dependencies, there is
controversy over the meaning of the term "addiction" and the efficacy of the
disease model for a range of supposed addictions, from alcoholism to compulsive
gambling.

            Even if sex addiction
exists, and even if Clinton qualifies, he is unlikely to claim the banner.
Politically, it's a loser. Or is it? It did work for Washington, D.C., Mayor
Marion Barry, a self-professed sex addict who rehabilitated himself politically
after a drug conviction by declaring his powerlessness over drugs and sex,
repenting, and entering a program. "Most people are recovering from something,"
he explained to the Washington Post . Barry won back the mayor's office
by embracing his own dysfunctions--but Washington is a dysfunctional city.

         
      
   
