
   
   
      
         
            You Be the Judge

            The central issue in the
dispute between Microsoft and the Justice Department is whether Windows 95, the
operating system, and Internet Explorer, the Web browser, are two separate
products or different parts of one single product. Microsoft says one product;
the government says two products. And the one-product-or-two test seems to be:
Can you take a computer with both Internet Explorer and Windows, eliminate
Internet Explorer, and still have Windows? The government says yes; Microsoft
says no.

            The
judge in the case, Thomas Penfield Jackson, announced in court last month that
he'd done it in about 90 seconds. Microsoft maintains that he did nothing of
the sort. Well, you're probably sitting in front of a computer right now.
You're probably using Windows, and there's a good chance you're also using, or
at least have installed, Internet Explorer. So here's your chance to duplicate
Jackson's experiment, try Microsoft's version of the experiment, and decide for
yourself who's got the better of the argument. Can you remove Internet Explorer
from your own computer without harming Windows?

            
Let's begin with Jackson. If you're going to
follow along, be sure to print this story now and save these instructions.
You'll definitely need them on paper.

            When Jackson retreated to
his chambers on Thursday, Dec. 18, he sat at his computer--what he described as
a machine running Windows 95--and in all likelihood, this is what he did.

            Click Start on your
screen. This will bring up a pop-up menu.

            Click Settings , then
choose Control Panel . A window will open.

            Double-click Add/Remove
Programs . This will bring up a list.

            Click Internet
Explorer in the list.

            Click Add/Remove . If
you're using Internet Explorer now, you'll have to quit. After a few minutes,
you'll be told to restart your machine.

            Upon
rebooting you'll find that the Internet Explorer icon is gone from your desktop
and Windows works fine. (To restore Internet Explorer, you'll need to have it
on your original Windows 95 CD-ROM or another disk. Or you can download a new
copy from www.microsoft.com/ie/.)

            
Microsoft's position is that Jackson did not
actually remove Internet Explorer from his computer because the add/remove
procedure leaves "components" of Internet Explorer on the machine. Later, if
you're curious about what these components are and how Microsoft decided which
components belong to Internet Explorer, read two key documents, both written by
David Cole, the Microsoft vice president in charge of the Internet Client and
Collaboration Division. Document
1 and Document 2 are both affidavits submitted to Jackson. In the
first affidavit, starting at Paragraph 41, you'll find a list of
components that are allegedly part of Internet Explorer.

            But
first, back to our experiment. A couple of serious warnings: Before removing
any components, you must save copies onto a floppy disk. Make sure you have
enough room on the floppy for all these files, as they take up about 1.2
megabytes. Later, you'll use this disk to copy the components back onto your
hard drive. Final warning: If your computer fails to work the way it used to
even after returning the components, I can't help you.

            
In the affidavits, Cole lists several
components he associates with Internet Explorer, including Wininet.dll,
Urlmon.dll, and Mshtml.dll. "Dll" stands for "dynamic-link library," and .dll
files are small chunks of computer code that are intended to be shared by more
than one application. One thing you might try is to find out how many .dll
files you have. Click Start , then Find , then Files or
Folders , type *.dll , then hit Find Now . (Make sure your hard
drive is selected in the drop-down list in Look in .) On my computer I
found 1,230 .dll files. Even if you used "Add/Remove" on Internet Explorer,
Wininet.dll, Urlmon.dll, and Mshtml.dll are still there. But Cole notes in his
affidavit that these files are included with Internet Explorer when it is
installed apart from Windows 95, from a disk or the Web. So let's get rid of
these files and see what happens. (You do have copies on disk, right?) Before
proceeding, write down or remember the directories where these files are found.
They're probably all in c:\windows\system.

            You
cannot remove these .dll files while Windows is running (which is part of
Microsoft's point). So get rid of Windows and go into MS-DOS. (Click
Start , click Shut Down , and choose Restart the computer in
MS-DOS mode .) When you see the age-old C:\ prompt, switch into the
directory where the .dll files are stored. (Type cd windows\system , for
example, and hit Enter.) Then delete the three files (type del
wininet.dll and hit Enter, then do the same for Urlmon.dll and Mshtml.dll).
Now type win to return to Windows.

            
Afew moments later you'll be back in the
familiar desktop environment. However, your Internet applications (other than
Internet Explorer--which you've removed, remember?) may have trouble running.
(Your e-mail system, for example.) Or they may work just fine. It all depends
on whether their authors designed them to use those three .dll files. If they
did, you're out of luck. (Microsoft people say that removing these files can
also cause problems with non-Internet programs, such as Microsoft Office and
Lotus Notes. You might try them too and see what happens, if you're feeling
reckless.)

            
Strangely, if you have a copy of Netscape Navigator installed, you'll see that
it runs fine. That's because Netscape doesn't use these particular .dll files.
In fact, most of my other Internet programs appeared to be functioning
normally, which surprised me, since I expected, as Microsoft has argued, that
my version of Windows would be severely crippled. Try running Internet Explorer
without these three components, though, and it really will be seriously
crippled. On my computer, Internet Explorer turned into a clear window, with a
view of the desktop where a Web page ought to be and failed to load any pages
from the Internet.

            
So for me, at least, this experiment tends to
support Microsoft's contention that Jackson didn't really remove Internet
Explorer as he claimed to have done but casts doubt on Microsoft's contention
that you can't truly remove Internet Explorer without crippling Windows. More
than anything, though, it casts doubt on whether a government policy decision
with billions of dollars at stake should really turn on a distinction--is it
one product or two products?--that, in the end, owes more to metaphysics
(divining the essential natures of things as inanimate as software programs)
than to reason.

            Anyway, after copying the
three .dll files back into the directory where they came from, restarting
Windows, and reinstalling Internet Explorer, the experiment is over and your
computer should be back in its original condition. At least mine was.

         
      
   
