
   
   
      
         
            The Microsoft Menace

            Microsoft is aggressively
seeking to shape the future of personal computing, Internet publishing, and
electronic commerce. It has achieved a dominant position in the computer
industry already and is poised to extend its reach. Is what is good for
Microsoft good for consumers? Not always. Consider the following:

            Microsoft has never been
known for its innovations. (Click for more on Microsoft's history of
borrowing.) Yet, Microsoft operating-system software is used to run between 80
percent and 90 percent of the world's personal computers now, and that share is
increasing.

            When personal computers
first entered the market, there was enormous innovation in new desktop-software
applications. In recent years, as Microsoft has come to dominate one important
desktop market after another, there have been fewer and fewer new entrants or
new products in these markets--and, many would say, far less innovation.

            Today the most important
challenge in selecting a word processor, relational database, or other desktop
application is finding a product that can perform adequately without crashing
when the user is running the latest version of Microsoft's Windows operating
system. More and more often the safest bet is--not surprisingly--Microsoft, the
only company that really knows how its operating system works and the only
company that can arbitrarily change how that operating system works. (For
examples of how Microsoft uses its control of the operating system to undermine
rivals, click .)

            The Internet is the most
successful new platform for publishing and sharing information. It developed in
an environment that was profoundly anti-monopolistic, and which embraced open
standards. Microsoft ignored the Internet initially, even creating a rival
proprietary network architecture for its Microsoft Network.

            Sun Microsystems has
developed a computer programming language named Java, designed so that programs
written in it would run on any computer, regardless of the operating system.
The Java language is very important for the development of feature-rich Web
publishing. Microsoft wants to create a special Java language for Windows. Its
version won't run on non-Microsoft operating systems, damaging the promise that
the same software will run on different computers. This will permit Microsoft
to exercise the same type of proprietary control over MS Java applications that
it does over other Windows applications.

            Microsoft, a firm known for
its aggressive anti-piracy campaigns, is spending tens (perhaps hundreds) of
millions of dollars to develop and promote the Microsoft Internet Explorer,
which it gives away. Why? By monopolizing the browser market, and by destroying
Java's promise as a cross-platform language, Microsoft will be in a position to
transform the Internet radically by moving toward a new set of Microsoft-owned
or Microsoft-controlled standards for Internet publishing and electronic
commerce. (For more on Microsoft's efforts to monopolize the Internet, click
.)

            Microsoft is trying to
position itself to own the software used by consumers to operate a new
generation of cable-TV systems, consumer electronics, and other devices that
will be used to connect to the information superhighway. This would extend the
monopoly Microsoft has on operating systems for personal computers.

            Not
content with its enormous market share in PC software, Microsoft wants to hold
our hand as we navigate the information superhighway, and to push us--not so
subtly--toward its own partners or subsidiaries by strategically placing
desktop or browser links to its products and services. This will give Microsoft
enormous advantages in positioning its own products in electronic commerce and
let it play kingmaker for other businesses. (For other examples of Microsoft's
predatory ways, click .)

            
For those who look into the future and are
concerned, there are some fundamental questions: What can be done? What should
be done? What will be done? Wherever Microsoft goes today or tomorrow, it must
not be allowed too much control over something as important as the way we
communicate with one another.

            Bill Gates wrote in The
Road Ahead about the need for a dialogue on the information highway. Next
month a group of industry leaders, academic specialists, consumer activists,
and government officials will gather in Washington, D.C., at a conference to debate
the impact of Microsoft's business practices and to develop strategies to
address the future of digital communications. How about joining us, Mr.
Gates?

            
               James Love, director of
the Consumer Project on
Technology, prepared additional material for this article.
            

         
      
   
