
   
   
      
         
            <I>Cogito Auto Sum</I>

            By Karenna
Gore

            Summary is the crux of
civilization. Long before the Information Age, man struggled to digest the
mounds of words contained in his religious, cultural, and legal canons. Fame
and fortune awaited those who could reduce windy texts to bite-sized portions.
One of the all-time master summarizers was Jesus, who, in the days before Cliff
Notes, condensed the 592,439 words of the Old Testament into two nuggets. "On
these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets," he announced. "Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind," and, "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself."

            Or at least, that is
what Matthew said Jesus said. Matthew might have been summarizing, too.

            Despite Jesus' excellent example, wordiness not only
persists but multiplies as new volumes enter the marketplace of ideas. Besieged
with information and short on time, what is a person to do? Luckily, whole
industries exist to serve consumers nutshells and breviloquence: Nexis, Web
search engines, executive summaries, cheat sheets, and the Reader's
Digest .

            To that list of
lifesavers, add an upstart, "AutoSummarize," a new function in the Word 97 word
processor (which is made by the same company that brings you Slate). Last week,
New York Times reporter Denise Caruso called AutoSummarize a "stunning"
technological achievement. It is not Slate's function to tout Microsoft
products, but AutoSummarize piqued our curiosity.

            
How does AutoSummarize work? According to Ron
Fein of the Word 97 team, AutoSummarize cuts wordy copy to the bone by counting
words and ranking sentences. First, AutoSummarize identifies the most common
words in the document (barring "a" and "the" and the like) and assigns a
"score" to each word--the more frequently a word is used, the higher the score.
Then, it "averages" each sentence by adding the scores of its words and
dividing the sum by the number of words in the sentence--the higher the
average, the higher the rank of the sentence. "It's like the ratio of wheat to
chaff," explains Fein.

            AutoSummarize can summarize
texts to 10 sentences, 20 sentences, 100 words, 500 words, or various
percentages of the original copy.

            Inspired by Caruso's
example, we turned the powers of AutoSummarize on four basic documents of
Western Civilization and four contemporary texts:

            

            

         
      
   
