
   
   
      
         
            Fiddling Around

            We all
know--supposedly--that if John F. Kennedy were president today, he wouldn't be.
His administration would have collapsed under the relentless reporting of his
dalliances with actresses such as Marilyn Monroe and Angie Dickinson, unsavory
characters such as mob moll Judith Campbell Exner, suspected East German spy
Ellen Rometsch, and twentysomething White House staffers known as Fiddle and
Faddle. Back in the 1960s, the men's club of reporters dined out on rumors of
Kennedy's adultery as they made sure those stories were kept out of the
newspapers. "We knew. We all knew," said former journalist and LBJ aide George
Reedy in historian Thomas Reeves' book on Kennedy, A Question of
Character . (Answer to the Question: rotten.)

            But it
has become a journalistic truism that the club has been disbanded, that today
the press would pursue rumors of flagrant infidelity by a president. As Joseph
Lelyveld, executive editor of The New York Times , recently told The
New York Observer , "[I]t was always clear that given [Clinton's] alleged
history, reckless philandering in the White House would be a story."

            
For proof one only has to look at the scandal
that has engulfed the administration, right? Yet something nags about the story
of the (yes, yes,) alleged affair between Clinton and his very own Fiddle,
Monica Lewinsky. If such behavior is a legitimate story, why has it taken six
years to find out that Clinton's rapacious sexual appetite has apparently never
been slaked but simply changed venue? During this time the press has surely had
as much suspicion about Clinton's misbehavior (click for some samples) as it
did of Kennedy's but has chosen, until recent weeks, mostly to ignore or
dismiss it.

            One
simple reason is that today, as in Kennedy's day, proof of presidential
misbehavior is hard to come by. We may all "know" JFK had an affair with
Monroe, but Seymour Hersh, while writing The Dark Side of Camelot , was
so desperate for evidence that for a time he was duped by forged documents
supposedly proving the liaison. In his history of the Kennedy era, Richard
Reeves writes that Kennedy, concerned that increasingly clamorous rumors of an
affair with Monroe might actually make it into print, sent former journalist
and Peace Corps official William Haddad to tell various publications that
Kennedy himself said the stories weren't true. Years later, Reeves writes,
Haddad said: "He lied to me. He used my credibility with people I knew."
(Attention Paul Begala.)

            
But when seemingly hard facts about Clinton's
past have thrust themselves upon the media, journalists have needed a different
justification for turning them aside other than the 1960s doctrine that it was
none of the public's business. That justification was the widely held
convention that during his candidacy Clinton addressed the issues of his past
infidelities, however obliquely, and that by electing him twice the public had
given him a pass. Commentator Mark Shields has said of the Lewinsky scandal
that it represents a violation of a "tacit agreement between Bill Clinton and
the American electorate in 1992." That is, the public would ignore his Arkansas
shenanigans as long as they didn't continue in the White House. Let's call it
the Ozark Exemption.

            
Lelyveld says the New York Times decided not to pursue 1993 allegations
of numerous simultaneous affairs--made by four Arkansas state troopers who
guarded then-Gov. Clinton--because "We made a deliberate choice ... not to be
aggressive on Clinton's Arkansas philandering ... partly because the country
had voted on it." It's debatable, however, how fully the public was informed of
the extent of Clinton's alleged womanizing. As Newsweek recently
reported, among other tactics, the campaign paid $100,000 to private
investigator Jack Palladino to find and discredit alleged Clinton paramours.
Larry Sabato, a political scientist at the University of Virginia, told The
New Yorker that Palladino led a "very aggressive campaign to suppress
information." One reporter I spoke to who covered the race said he came to
believe--but of course never made public--that Clinton had had hundreds of
lovers.

            
The handling of the Troopergate charges is
illustrative of the media's discomfort with the whole subject. In December
1993, both the Los Angeles Times and the Clinton-bashing American
Spectator published similar versions of the story almost simultaneously.
There was a small flurry of attention among the networks, but according to the
Columbia Journalism Review , CBS declined even to air the charges. The
New York Times wrote only reluctantly about it, and the Washington
Post treated it mostly as a media story. Within the Los Angeles
Times , publication of the story was controversial. Jack Nelson, the paper's
Washington bureau chief at the time, said, "there was conspiracy, in my
opinion, by right-wingers" to force the newspaper to run the story before it
was ready. (Representing the troopers was Arkansas attorney and avowed
Clinton-hater Cliff Jackson, who had tried to arrange for a right-wing
financier to create a fund for the troopers before publication, in case they
lost their jobs.)

            

               Columbia Journalism Review writer Christopher Hanson even called for a
return to the standards of Kennedy's day. He wrote: "In the 1960s, after all,
just a few dozen national reporters could define what is news, and they were
able to decide that JFK's sexual adventures (an open secret) did not qualify.
Today, unfortunately, the rationalists have lost the power to set standards of
relevancy."

            
There was a central charge in both the Los
Angeles Times and American Spectator accounts that should have been
a warning that Clinton's predilections weren't just history but also current
events. This was that Clinton, after his election to the presidency , had
the troopers escort a woman to the basement of the governor's mansion to meet
him at dawn while Hillary slept upstairs. (It also signaled a penchant for the
convenience, and risk, of cheating at home--a trait for which Kennedy was
known.) And a now eerily familiar phrase--one that seems unlikely to be spoken
spontaneously--recurs in the Los Angeles Times story. When the paper
contacted the unnamed woman said to have met Clinton in the basement, she
responded that "there was no improper relationship." Another woman confronted
by reporters at first denied even knowing Clinton. Subsequently she told them
she and Clinton had not had "an improper relationship."

            The
American Spectator piece led directly to Paula Jones. Identified only as
"Paula" in the story, she was described by one trooper as offering to become
Clinton's girlfriend after their encounter. She filed suit against Clinton in
1994, charging that Clinton had exposed himself to her. But while she got
plenty of media attention, her story was widely dismissed as irrelevant under
the Ozark Exemption, or as the nattering of, in the words of Newsweek 's
Evan Thomas, "some sleazy woman with big hair coming out of the trailer
parks"--a remark for which he later apologized. It wasn't until Stuart Taylor
Jr.'s 1996 American Lawyer investigation that the rest of the media
began to take the charges, though perhaps not Jones, seriously. The media's
class bias protected Clinton from women like Jones and Gennifer Flowers--surely
he couldn't be attracted to a woman who wasn't a Yale Law School graduate!

            
The other significant story of Clinton's
continuing sexual adventuring was Michael Isikoff's account last August of a
"murky" encounter between White House volunteer Kathleen Willey and the
president. The allegation, reported in Newsweek , is that when Willey met
alone with Clinton at the White House in 1993 to ask for a paying job, Clinton
made a pass at her--a charge denied by the president's attorney. What Isikoff
couldn't pin down was whether the advance was welcome or not. Among media
heavyweights the story was about as welcome as a piece of kryptonite. The
New York Times didn't even cover the Willey story until the Lewinsky
allegations broke in January and the Washington Post dismissed it as a
media imbroglio--the Drudge Report had leaked details before
publication.

            Perhaps
the only person who took the account seriously was the president himself.
Recent reports allege that Clinton broke off his sexual relationship with
Lewinsky around that time because he was afraid of the attention the Willey
story might provoke. (Kennedy, too, took action when liaisons became too
dangerous. For more on that, click .)

            
The Lewinsky story exploded because it takes
the president's behavior beyond the sexual into the criminal--with its looming
questions of perjury and obstruction of justice. Historian Thomas Reeves
believes that, despite the media's reluctance to look into Kennedy's private
life, if he had lived to have a second term: "[T]he realities of his lechery
and his dealings with Sam Giancana might have leaked out while he was still in
office, gravely damaging the presidency. ... Impeachment might well have
followed such public disclosure." In other words, the careless only stay lucky
for so long.

         
      
   
