
   
   
      
         
            The Case Against the Case Against Microsoft

            
               (Note: Ralph Nader made
the case against
Microsoft in Slate two weeks ago. In the following article, hotlinks
lead to more detailed discussion.)
            

            It is no crime for a company
to be successful. The are designed to complement, not displace, market forces.
The laws do not prevent market winners from enjoying the fruits of their
success or protect losers from the consequences of their failure.

            What the
antitrust laws do condemn is anti-competitive conduct--truly exclusionary or
predatory acts--by firms that have ""--the power to raise prices or exclude
competitors from the market. Microsoft's critics have never established that
Microsoft and its conduct satisfy either element of the law.

            In most discussions of Microsoft, it is just assumed that
the company has monopoly power. However, no court has ever reached that
conclusion. Even though more than 80 percent of the personal computers in the
world use Microsoft's operating system, it is far from clear that an antitrust
court could be persuaded that personal computer operating systems constitute a
separate market. After all, Microsoft's critics claim that browsers in the near
future will (or perhaps already do) .

            Even
assuming for the sake of argument that Microsoft does have monopoly power, the
question still is whether truly anti-competitive behavior accounts for its
success. We don't need to speculate about the answer, because government
antitrust enforcers have spent the better part of seven years putting
Microsoft's competitive behavior under a microscope.

            
Almost seven years ago the Federal Trade
Commission set out to determine whether Microsoft had monopolized personal
computer operating systems. After one of the most extensive antitrust
investigations in history (completed by the Justice Department when the FTC
failed to issue a complaint), the government found only a single, rather
picayune practice--the so-called "per processor" license--worthy of challenge.
According to the government itself, that practice did not account for
Microsoft's competitive success. Rather than suffer the cost and hassle of
litigation, Microsoft agreed to a ending the practice.

            For
Microsoft, acceding to the consent decree was just the beginning. Bill Gates
couldn't blow his nose without starting a new investigation. The Justice
Department stopped Microsoft from acquiring Intuit, the maker of Quicken
personal-finance software. It threatened to block Microsoft's introduction of
Windows 95 because Microsoft included the .

            Now comes the charge that Microsoft has by including its
Internet browsing software, Internet Explorer, with Windows 95. Microsoft
points to a that was negotiated by Microsoft for the specific purpose of
allowing the company to include IE with Windows.

            It is
telling that the government chose not to attack the "bundling" of IE with
Windows as an actual antitrust violation--merely as a violation of the consent
decree. Whatever the technical merits of the government's interpretation of the
decree, you have to wonder what important public interest will be served if the
government's case succeeds. Microsoft makes the IE browser to consumers who buy
new personal computers with Windows 95 installed. And more convenient, seamless
access to the Internet from the desktop will . It is hard to see any
anti-competitive danger that justifies denying people these benefits.

            
Microsoft's inclusion of IE with Windows does
not prevent computer manufacturers from installing competing browsers or
putting those browsers on the desktop. Indeed, the computer companies that
wanted to take IE off their desktops (the behavior Justice wants to prevent
Microsoft from forbidding) probably intended to give Netscape Navigator an
exclusive position on the desktop. Microsoft did not demand that Netscape be
removed, only that IE be there as well. This may be the first time that the
government has gone against a company with a smaller share of sales in order to
protect the ability of its dominant competitor to secure an exclusive.

            So after
seven years and millions of dollars spent investigating Microsoft, the
government seems to have found virtually no anti-competitive acts to account
for the company's success. Is this because all Microsoft's competitors,
licensees, and suppliers are too scared to tell the government what they know?
Unlikely. Has the government not tried hard enough? Hardly. All the incentives
for antitrust enforcers--media adulation, professional recognition, and
congressional budgetary rewards--push the government toward "bagging the
biggest game." We taxpayers are employing an army of lawyers and economists who
spend their every waking moment--and probably a few in dreamland--thinking of
ways to get Microsoft. They are the best in the business, and their efforts
have turned up precious little.

            The ongoing government scrutiny itself may help to explain
the absence of verifiable episodes of anti-competitive behavior by Microsoft. A
swarm of government enforcers peering over a company's shoulder is a strong
incentive for it to behave. More fundamentally, though, Microsoft's success is
not a mystery requiring any criminal explanation. The real and obvious source
is the good fortune of being the pre-eminent operating system on IBM PCs. This
is not an antitrust violation.

            
Microsoft's position is a reflection of an economic phenomenon often referred
to as "network externalities" (a k a "positive economic feedback" or
"increasing returns to scale"). In the market for personal computers, the value
of a machine is directly proportional to the number of applications that run on
it. Both suppliers and consumers will gravitate toward , regardless of whether
it is technically the best. Once such a standard becomes predominant, it will
be very difficult to displace--at least until the next "paradigm shift" comes
along.

            
Being the operating system on IBM PCs, which
set the standard for personal computing, meant that Microsoft became the
standard personal computer operating system. The fact that Microsoft won that
round is no guarantee it will emerge the winner of the next paradigm shift. In
the browser wars, Microsoft faces a formidable array of opponents--Sun and
Oracle, to name just two--and, after two years, it still lags behind Netscape
even though IE generally gets better reviews than Navigator.

            Microsoft's competitors,
however, want the government to put some sand in Microsoft's saddlebags.
However frightening Bill Gates may seem or however unfair and imperfect the
market phenomenon of network externalities may appear, do we really want
antitrust lawyers and economists determining Internet standards? It's difficult
to believe the answer is "yes."

         
      
   
