
   
   
      
         
            The Republican Endgame

            "We
should do everything we can to get this resolved and find a way to have [Saddam
Hussein] removed from office one way or another."

            
               --Senate Majority
Leader Trent Lott (R-Miss.)
            

            "I
venture, therefore, to propose that a small bell be procured, and attached by a
ribbon round the neck of the Cat."

            
               --Aesop's
Fables
            

            The Republicans are behaving
very responsibly on Iraq. From the start they have made it clear that the scent
of scandal wafting through the corridors of the White House will not for a
single moment distract them from fulsome support for the commander in chief as
he faces down the Butcher of Baghdad. "In matters of international relations,
the United States is one nation," said House Speaker Newt Gingrich, as he
spurned reporters' questions on l'affaire Lewinsky two weeks ago.

            But
Saddam Hussein is not the only leader who should worry about the loyalty of his
Republican Guard. For by stipulating that the head of Saddam Hussein is the
sole token of success, the GOP has staked out a comfortable position from which
to criticize any Clinton administration assault on Iraq. If Clinton restricts
the bombing to "surgical" (i.e., relatively low civilian-casualty) strikes and
Saddam escapes, as he did in 1991, the Republicans can charge him with timid
leadership (unsurprising from a chicken who dodged the draft). And if he
commits the ground troops probably needed to eliminate Saddam and lots of
American soldiers start dying, they can attack him for recklessness with our
boys' lives (unsurprising from a guy who let others die for him in
Vietnam).

            Of course, the Republicans hasten to make it clear that
they don't actually advocate murdering Saddam. Heaven forfend. Why, that
would violate a presidential order dating back to President Gerald Ford, a
well-known Republican. And they certainly wouldn't want to be responsible for
putting U.S. ground troops into bloody combat with Saddam's household guard.
That could make for really lousy television. Having echoed the recommendations
of 18 leading foreign-policy experts who called for Saddam's ouster, Republican
leaders beat a rhetorical retreat at the end of last week. He still wouldn't
settle for a "halfway deal," clarified Lott, but "I'm willing to support the
president and America in doing what has to be done, whatever that is."

            Well,
whatever is that? Writing in the "Outlook" section of the Washington
Post last Sunday, leading Republican hawk Richard Perle tried to explain.
"The United States," he wrote, "should encourage, recognize, help finance, arm
and protect with air power a new provisional government broadly representative
of all the people of Iraq." That's a happy thought. I wonder if anyone has
talked it over with Saddam? In the New Republic , Eliot A. Cohen counsels
making "ousting Saddam a top priority," and pursuing that objective with
airstrikes that "number in the thousands, not hundreds" and lasting over
"weeks, not days." I wonder what the pope would say about that.

            
Sure, Clinton might get lucky. Saddam is not,
after all, immortal. And the administration has made clear that it's not above
bombing a palace or two no matter who's inside. And this time, it says, its
weapons really are "smart." The U.S. military also plans to target the Iraqi
Republican Guards' favorite toys--artillery weapons, tanks, and other heavy
weapons--as well as their hardened bunkers and munitions factories, hoping that
Saddam's "elite" troops will finally decide the price of propping up the
dictator has become too high. George Bush was not a lucky man. Bill Clinton,
despite his self-inflicted wounds, surely is.

            More
likely, though, the limited warfare proposed by the administration will come to
a less than fully satisfying conclusion. Saddam obviously cares nothing for the
suffering of his people, except to display their torn bodies on television as
evidence of American evil. The chemical and biological weapons that are
supposedly the main concern of U.S. and U.N. inspectors are easily moved and
hidden. Even our noble Saudi allies aren't willing to lend us their air bases.
Saddam could emerge strengthened (and America tarnished) in the eyes of the
Arab world.

            How much better, then--so much cleaner and more
satisfying--is the Republican solution. Let's just get rid of Saddam. Makes you
wonder why no one thought of it before. Perhaps they didn't, because they had
in mind the conclusion of Aesop's famous fable--the one about the mice who
decided to protect themselves from their "sly and treacherous" enemy, the cat,
by tying a bell around its neck.

            "This proposal," wrote the
fabulist, "met with general applause, until an old mouse got up and said: 'That
is all very well, but who is to bell the Cat?' The mice looked at one another
and nobody spoke. Then the old mouse said: 'It is easy to propose impossible
remedies.' "

         
      
   
