
   
   
      
         
            The Sound of One Hand Talking

            Last week, John Hope
Franklin, the venerable Duke University historian and chair of the president's
advisory board on race, told reporters that his panel would refuse to hear from
opponents of affirmative action in higher education. This policy seems both
wrong in principle and politically foolish. Why on earth have a panel dedicated
to racial reconciliation and exclude one of the two views that need to be
reconciled on the most divisive racial issue? What harm could come from letting
critics have their say, compared with the harm of seeming to censor them?
Franklin's only explanation was an imperious, "I'm not certain what [California
affirmative-action critic Ward] Connerly could contribute to this
discussion."

            A senior
official working with the panel is a bit less opaque. "The point of the
committee is to help formulate White House policy. So why should we appoint
people who disagree with the President? Why hear testimony from people who
vehemently disagree with him?" Another member of the panel's staff said, "This
is not the Kerner Commission," referring to the panel appointed by President
Johnson after the urban riots of the 1960s.

            President Clinton said the panel's mission was to be "a
great and unprecedented conversation about race." But apparently the main
purpose of convening the committee's monthly meetings is to provide an occasion
for the administration to unveil installments of the President's Race
Initiative--a yearlong parade of minipolicies. Last week, for instance, the
White House announced that $15 million would be divided among 67 different
nonprofit groups so they can bring more housing-discrimination cases.

            The White
House concocts these policies, without say from committee members. Behind the
inflated rhetoric, the Franklin panel has only a slim mandate and little power.
It is not legally allowed to meet in private and cannot even write its own
final report--prerequisites for any self-respecting commission.

            
Another bit of the explanation concerns the
people running the panel. In theory, John Hope Franklin is the perfect chair
for an anodyne exercise in racial reconciliation. His public image is that of
an avuncular Southern gentleman. Franklin is the Jackie Robinson of historians:
the first black chair of an integrated history department and the first black
president of the major American history associations. His most important books
rewrote 90 years of wrongheaded, often racist, historiography of
Reconstruction. (The black carpetbaggers, who ruled parts of the South
following the Civil War, were sincere democrats, he proved, not venal
dictators.)

            But over
the last decade, Franklin's lectures and essays on race have acquired a
pessimistic, angry edge. He laments the permanence of racism, which he feels is
now deeply entrenched in almost every American institution. Franklin, who
researched briefs for Brown vs. Board and marched in Selma, expected the
civil-rights revolution to remake society. Instead of dramatic change, he sees
only marginal improvement and enduring black urban poverty, job discrimination,
and even Jim Crow attitudes. And he says those who ignore the extent of this
racism are not only mistaken but also racist. They "have no interest in
achieving a color-blind society and would be horrified if we even approached
it."

            Franklin is old. The real power in the panel rests with
Harvard law Professor Christopher Edley Jr. Edley plans the committee strategy
and will write the final report on race relations. As a White House aide in
Clinton's first term, Edley was author of the administration's
characteristically nuanced (or, if you prefer, mushy and having-it-both-ways)
"mend it, don't end it" policy for affirmative action. But since leaving the
government, Edley has become more shrill. In a round-table debate on the
Atlantic Monthly 's Web site, he repeatedly calls opponents of
affirmative action "counterrevolutionaries." He says, "Though their opposition
to these measures is framed as principle, certainly their real goal is to
protect the current distribution of privilege and opportunity that has produced
white-male elites in virtually every sector." Most recently, Edley has called
America in Black and White , Abigail and Stephan Thernstrom's
anti-affirmative-action tome, a "crime against humanity."

            Edley and Franklin are
entitled to their views, which may even be correct. But should people with such
strident opinions be responsible for a panel on racial reconciliation? It seems
especially stupid for the administration to spew platitudes about the panel's
mission of healing if its intention was to push one side of a contentious
debate.

         
      
   
