
   
   
      
         
            Dick Morris' New, Improved, Low Calorie Testament

            It shouldn't have been a
complete surprise when I walked into the elevator in my Washington office
building and came upon Dick Morris clutching a book by the late Cardinal
Bernardin. If you've been revealed as a moral degenerate, the natural course in
American political life as it has evolved in our times is to come back as a
newly enlightened spiritual spokesman--St. Augustine for the klieg light
age.

            Last
fall, Morris gave an interview to the Door , the world's funniest
evangelical humor magazine, in which he traced the arc of this sort of
spiritual/professional recovery. "In the last year, the whole focus on career,
work, and money making has declined significantly as part of my life. They're
not the things that I think about constantly," Morris said with beguiling
innocence. "At some point I would very much like to be able to have a national
talk radio show and a national television show and a national column to be able
to bring my views to those Americans who would care to hear them. I don't
believe that I should really do this until I am further along my own personal
growth and evolution."

            
America, the wait is over. Over the past three
months, Morris has emerged from his long weeks in the wilderness and come to
the point at which he can stop thinking about his career and start thinking
about getting a national radio show, TV show, and column. Rising above his
careerist mentality, Morris now spends more time in the studios of our
second-tier TV networks than William Ginsburg. And it's working. On April 13,
Howard Kurtz of the Washington Post reported Morris is close to signing
a deal with Fox. And he is writing a provocative column for the New York
Post and the Hill , a Capitol Hill newspaper. He is succeeding as a
political pundit in part because of his interesting vantage point--he hates
Hillary but loves Bill--and in part because he is the Michael Milken of the
attention economy. Everything he says--Hillary's a lesbian, there are seven
stages to the television age and he's got them all figured out, the Republicans
are going to sweep the November elections--is clever and provocative. Not all
these positions have great substantive thought behind them, but nobody gets
punished in the pundit games for being too ephemeral.

            The
great sorrow of Morris' second life is that the corrupt world wants to drag him
back into the arena of politics. Morris' real focus, as he lets you know before
you have a chance to ask, is the Higher Realms. Morris has been doing some
polling on spiritual issues, and he has discovered that morality is big. For
example, a few months ago, he had his pollsters read the following statement to
a survey group:

            Look into our own
bodies, with billions of cells which must work together or we die. When a cell
does its own thing, that's called cancer. So it is with people of the earth.
Unless we work for our planet, we will die of the global cancer of pollution,
war and disease. He found 66 percent of the people supported that statement,
and only 28 percent opposed it (who the hell are they?). He concluded in a
Hill column, "Idealism is, I believe, the new force in our politics.
Cynicism is on its way out."

            
The odd thing is that Morris himself is not
cynical, at least not self-consciously so. He is genuinely excited about this
new spiritual stuff he has discovered, and sincere--painfully sincere--when he
gives you his ideas about his plan to renew American morality. His tone at
these times is a mixture of consultant-omniscience and saintly humility--as if
Gandhi had become one of those guys you hear on the management channels of the
airplane audio system. When Morris talks about his spiritual platform, his eyes
lower. He reiterates he is not qualified to speak on these issues. He is to
humility what Louis XIV was to gilt-edged furniture. He has built a palace to
house his own unworthiness, and if you talk to him, he takes you on an extended
tour to show off all his rooms. But he can't not talk about these
things, he implies, because he has come up with a unique message that simply
must be heard.

            Morris
calls his spiritual platform "Transactionalism." It's not based on a specific
organized religion. "Those who fear hell are religious; those who've been there
are spiritual," Morris told the Door , echoing a sentiment he learned
from the addiction movement (he is a recovering sex addict). Transactionalism
is instead a series of policy ideas that would improve America's spiritual
indicators. As he talks about them, you realize that if America followed his
advice, God's favorable/unfavorable ratings would go through the roof.

            
Some of the ideas are a little mushy, though
not entirely unworthy. Morris wants to set up a series of redemption centers
where ex-cons could get a certificate proving they are redeemed and therefore
employable. He would like to see a private association create a certification
symbol that clothing manufacturers could put on their labels to show the
products were made by well treated workers. He says he has dozens of ideas like
these.

            If the
Almighty had properly focus-grouped the Old Testament, it would be chock-full
of this stuff. There's lots of noble praise for the civil society movement
wrapped around a series of small, feel-good ideas that elicit warm and
pleasant-feeling grunts of approval. If you remember the issues floated by the
Clinton re-election campaign--gun control for deadbeat dads, for example--the
tone will be familiar. What is striking about Transactionalism, and about
Morris' whole approach to spirituality, is how much it is a continuation of his
political style. Morris is still manipulating images and spinning, but now he
is spinning for souls, not votes. He seems genuinely repentant of his personal
sins. But he evidently sees no contradiction between the amoral spinmeistering
of the political consultant and his new vocation. He recently recalled a
problem he faced a few years ago, when a congressional candidate he was working
for was caught with a series of transsexual prostitutes. Morris proudly noted
that he solved the problem and got the guy elected. When asked if the guy was
guilty, Morris seemed taken aback by the question. He said he guessed the guy
was guilty, since a few years later he was caught again and had to resign in
disgrace.

            
America has always had a spiritual self-help
literature that reconciles redemption with résumé-building. For example, Bruce
Barton's The Man Nobody Knows , a best seller in 1925-26, portrays Jesus
as the ultimate businessman. "He picked 12 men from the bottom ranks of the
business and forged them into an organization that conquered the world," reads
a typical Barton sentence. But in truth, the yuppie spiritualism of the moment
is the perfect breeding ground for Morris' style of rebirth. It takes religion,
removes all the dark images that drive up its negatives--like judgment,
obligation, or anything that might not be career enhancing--and replaces them
with self-esteem and moral medals of honor. No wonder so many find this
market-tested spiritualism so cool. Morris' book, Behind the Oval
Office , ends with a conversation between him and Bill Clinton on why the
forgiving St. Patrick is better than the stern St. Paul.

            I had another glimpse of
Morris' oddly naive spiritual self-enhancement while working on this article.
After a meeting with Morris, I mentioned his new vocation to a

                  Slate
                editor, who suggested I do a piece. I called Morris to set
up an interview about his ideas and left a message. Then I ran into him at a
party. I had a pleasant conversation with him and his wife. Morris was excited
to talk about Transactionalism and promised to call. He did, and we set up a
time to talk more. But then he called back and said that since he was now a
pundit, he should write the piece about his ideas, rather than have me write
about him. Morris' ambitions are all on the surface, and you could see that he
wanted to crack into 
                  Slate
                and control the piece. I confess I've
never had the subject of a piece try to replace me as author, but I figured it
was up to the editors; so I gave Morris my editor's number. But 30 minutes
later, Morris called on his way to church (it was Good Friday), sounding
contrite and saying that he would "back off" and would call at 2:30 to talk. He
never called, and now he has stopped returning my messages. I figure he made
three or four false promises to me during our preliminary conversations as he
tried to figure out how to play this to his advantage. None was serious,
obviously, and one suspects the new Morris wouldn't lie about a big thing. But
it is the web of easy evasions that is the essence of Morrisism, both in his
politico past and in his Augustinian present.

            Dostoyevsky wrote a book
called The Idiot about a guy who is unprepossessing and naturally holy.
Morris is more of an idiot savant. He seems sincerely interested in
understanding holiness. But he can't stop spinning ideas, images, and sound
bites, can't stop playing everything to his advantage. Watching him, you can
see why some of those monks felt it necessary to take vows of silence.

         
      
   
