
   
   
      
         
            Cook's Cranky Achievement
            

            Dear Marjorie,

            Blanche Wiesen Cook is two volumes into an Eleanor Roosevelt biography that
will stretch to thousands of pages. Its worldview is cranky and at times
irresponsible. Its subject is a busybody. And yet these books are a real
achievement. They leave no doubt that Eleanor deserves a William Manchester to
her Winston Churchill or, for that matter, a Frank Freidel to her FDR.

            A recap: Eleanor Roosevelt is born in 1884, orphaned early. Her mother lives
just long enough to inculcate in her (unjustifiably) a sense of her own
awkwardness. Her beloved father, Elliott Roosevelt, is a kind-hearted drunk who
dies at 34, hounded to the grave by a sadistic and mentally warped elder
brother, who (perhaps smarting at having been outshone by Elliott in his youth)
slanders him in public, fleeces him out of his money, turns his family against
him, and seeks to get him institutionalized. That brother, Teddy, becomes
president in 1901. (OK ... so that's more my opinion than Cook's.)

            Eleanor attends Allenswood, Marie Souvestre's radical girls' school in
England, a vaguely Sapphic environment where she learns four languages and much
poetry, and blossoms. No room for that back in the States, once she marries her
cousin Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Eleanor comes under the thumb of her
passive-aggressive mother-in-law Sara (Nurse Ratched-cum-Martha Stewart), who
uses the family finances to stay Top Woman in her son's life.

            FDR is bound for glory: New York state senator, assistant secretary of the
Navy 1913-1921, vice presidential nominee 1920, New York governor 1929-32, then
president to 1945. He's also, in Cook's nice phrase "a flirt, a bottom-pincher,
and a knee-holder." When ER discovers love letters from Lucy Mercer while
unpacking his trunk, she offers him his "freedom." If that's a euphemism for
divorce, he declines. If it means freedom tout court , he accepts.

            So does she. And in a strange way, after an initial frost, their marriage
grows more tender as it grows more distant. (Let's talk more about this.) He
veers into the man's world of Albany, Washington and, once he's stricken with
polio, the spa he starts in Warm Springs, Ga. She becomes a woman's
agitator--trade unions, suffrage, Democratic Party backrooms. Cook's bombshell
is her assertion that Eleanor, throughout the White House years, was in a
passionate lesbian relationship with AP reporter Lorena Hickok. "Hick" is a
deeply sympathetic character--from a broken Midwestern home, she knows not only
real breadline-and-boardinghouse poverty but also opera and poetry. She's
Eleanor's Boswell/Eckermann and Cook's eyes and ears.

            In the White House, Eleanor is too immersed in her life of women's activism
to change. But she adapts so skillfully that no one quite realizes it. She
continues with coalition-building, starts a column ("My Day"), and grapples
with America's race problem. Under Hick's influence, she occupies herself with
the Poor of all sexes. The White House has two social circles, two policy
circles, two agendas. But while Eleanor's agenda looks
separatist--women-only press conferences, an attempt to avert World War II
through a Lysistrata -style "women's strike for peace"--it also succeeds
in grafting onto Roosevelt's coalition new blocs of the
hitherto-disenfranchised without which the New Deal would be impracticable. The
only shameful note: Eleanor's seeming indifference to the plight of Europe's
Jews.

            This is Whig History for the PC era, full of paeans to same-sex love,
sweeping generalizations about emotional needs, attacks on present-day lack of
civility, and you-go-girl!-type interjections. Such history brings strengths:
Since Cook's first allegiance is to feminism (more specifically, to gay
rights), she is not dug in on most of the political and economic questions that
divide FDR's hagiographers from his detractors. She thus shows the elitist,
paternalist (and shallow) roots of Franklin's progressivism, his tendency to
compromise, the personalism of his program. (I'd make the case that Eleanor had
more in common with him than it appears.) It also brings weaknesses: This is
radical history, and Cook's description of post-World War I race riots, of the
Wobblies' agitation in the 1920s, of mid-1930s anti-communism (which she calls
a "Red Scare"), could have been written by Earl Browder.

            Sorry to run on. These are excellent books to be read with extreme caution.
I'm puzzled that Cook at once urges that we study Eleanor in her own right, yet
so "privileges" these first five years of her husband's administration. I'm
bothered that Cook uses the old leftist trick of praising her subject's
visionary radicalism, and then condemning as alarmist fabricators those who
recognize but don't like it. (A particular paradox: In insisting on Eleanor's
lesbianism as central, she follows the lack of circumspection of ER's
contemporary detractors , not allies.) I wonder if rich ladies'
self-actualization provides a useful model for legislation to help poor women.
I'm also curious about how Cook would compare Eleanor and Hillary
Clinton--since she is constantly inviting 1990s comparisons. But I'm most
curious about what you think.

            Best,
Chris.

         
      
   
