
   
   
      
         
            In a Graveyard Spiral of Whimsy
            

            Dear Cynthia,

            As long as we're talking about cyber protocol, allow me to grouse about why
computers constantly have to tell us more about their own internal activities
than anybody wants to know. Just signing on to check my e-mail gives me the
impression I might be inadvertently launching a nuclear missile: "Dialing",
"Communicating at 28,800 bauds," "Starting PPP," "Authenticating," all of this
ending up in an inscrutable "Status" box with graphs and blinking lights and
various pronouncements whose urgent meanings no human could ever know.

            I'm with you on "MacArthur Park"; I'm with you on "Crimson and Clover"; but
"Convoy" is one of those songs, like "The Battle of New Orleans," "Tie Me
Kangaroo Down, Sport," "Please Mister Custer," and Walter Brennan's
unforgettable talking rendition of "The Epic Ride of John H. Glenn" (it's on
the flip side of "Old Rivers"), that I'm just going to give a pass to.

            This is our last exchange for the week, right? From this distance, our
discussions seem to have started out on a suitably high and somber note with
the death of John Kennedy Jr., but our ephemeral natures soon got the better of
us. Before we could move on to the Republican tax cut, the Mexican banking
crisis, or the fate of Taiwan, we found ourselves--to use a phrase from this
unfortunate week--in a "graveyard spiral" of whimsy. And it is only with a
great effort of will that I now refrain from referring you to my new favorite
publication, Beer Frame: The Journal of Inconspicuous Consumption ,
and its article on the superiority of the Hydrox to the Oreo, its salute to
products with "edible spokescharacters" like the Pillsbury Doughboy, Charlie
the Tuna, and Slim Jim, and finally its definitive history of the styptic
pencil ("styptic," proclaims the editors, "is such an excellent word"). If you
can top that for meaninglessness, you are welcome to try. In the meantime, it
should be stated for the record that your own book on the history of the
abortion wars is a marvel of substance and you should not necessarily be judged
by the lowbrow online company you've been keeping all week.

            With lard in my pocket (yeccch),
Steve

         
      
   
