
   
   
      
         
            Weekend Cocktail Chatter
            

            Rather perplexing that on a day when Lord Greenspan spooked the bond market
with talk of a possible--though still only possible--rate hike, bank stocks
were doing so well. (If inflation and interest rates are on the way up, that's
usually a bad thing for banks.) On the other hand, maybe it's not so
perplexing, just an indication that bond traders and stock traders aren't
hearing the same news, believing the same things, or expecting the same future.
Of course, most stock traders apparently were hearing the same news
today, as tech stocks got battered again.

            What an odd week. The earnings numbers could not have been better. With the
rare exception, just about every tech bellwether that's reported has come in
ahead of expectations, and those were expectations that were about as high as
any reasonable person could put them. But, again with the rare exception, all
these bellwethers have seen their stock prices get crunched. This only goes to
show you one thing, which happens to be the most important thing to know about
investing: Trying to game the market in the short-term is the definition of
foolishness. Dump your money into an index fund, and you won't have to worry
about any of these anxieties disrupting your weekend barbecues. And so, chat
on. (By the way, this will be the last weekend chatter for a couple of weeks,
since 
                  Slate
               's running a short schedule next week. But we will
return.)

            1. "Sometimes, apparently, the Wall Street Journal forgets itself.
Consider this description of a small Christian sect: 'Bruderhofs live
communally and don't engage in violence, private-property ownership or
gossip .' I can just see it now. 'Jack's a brawler and he's always talking
behind people's backs. But he doesn't own any property, so at least he's got
that going for him.'"

            2. "Online music retailer ... no, that's not exactly right. Online music
digitizer ... no . Online music something MP3.com went public to much
anticipation Wednesday, and saw its shares leap from $28 to $105 in a matter of
minutes. Of course, the stock is now down around $61. So you can say that
MP3.com's shares nearly quadrupled on their first day and that they were
cut almost in half on their first day. Ain't the Net wonderful?"

            3. "Best thing a CEO has said in a long time: Time Warner's Gerald
Levin to Daily Variety about possible successors to Bob Daly and
Terry Semel, 'All current candidates are speculation and unless you talk to
me it's all bullshit .' Of course, you wonder if the reporter then said,
'But I am talking to you.'"

            4. "At long last, UPS is becoming a public company . Now the next time
UPS workers go on strike, management will have another club to bludgeon them
with. 'Our shareholders demand that we hold the line on part-time labor and
wage increases!' Music to my ears."

            5. "Despite the fact that Mexican taxpayers are on the hook for $71
billion to bail out a host of banks that the Mexican government has been
propping up for most of this decade, the government continues to insist that no
public official did anything wrong and that no one should be punished. 'Not
one single Mexican lost a peso in their bank accounts,' a spokesman for the
Finance Ministry said. Apparently the pesos that taxpayers are sending to the
government to bail out the banks don't count."

            6. "French oil company Elf Aquitaine made a $51 billion counterbid
this week to acquire competitor TotalFina, which had previously announced a
hostile takeover attempt on Elf. 'You see, the problem isn't the merging part,'
you can almost hear the Elf executives saying. 'The problem is the
us-losing-our-jobs part.'"

            7. "From the most recent issue of the Atlantic : 'When they envision
their future, Xers don't just see a government drifting toward the political
equivalent of Chapter 11 ; they also see a crippled social structure, a
dwindling middle class, and a despoiled natural habitat.' Wow. Who knew that
Xers lived in 1974?"

         
      
   
