
   
   
      
         
            Chatterbox Goes Soft on Clinton

            Watching a C-SPAN replay last night of President Clinton's press conference
(click here to watch it; click here to
read a transcript), Chatterbox was struck by the chief executive's comfort and
ease. Here's a sample exchange:

            

               
                  Q: Another question about the presidential race. Aside from asking George
W. Bush to come forward and give specifics on the issues that you mentioned,
could you tell us what you find objectionable about his trying to present a new
moderate face for his party just like you did for the Democrats? And could you
tell us whether you're worried whether he will figure out how the Republicans
can occupy the center of American politics?
               

               A: No.

               Q: Do you have any hints?

               A: No, no, I don't think I'll answer those questions.

               [Laughter.]

               
                  I will say. I will--no, look, let me say again I wouldn't even agree with
the characterization you gave of my first answer. When I ran for president in
1991, the first thing I did was tell the American people what I thought was
going on in our country and what I would do. And if you remember, the late
Senator Paul Tsongas and I were actually almost ridiculed at the time because
we both put out these very detailed plans of what we would do. If you go back
and get one of those plans now, you'll see that virtually everything we said
we'd do, we did do, except for the things we tried to do and were defeated
on.
               

            

            Clinton's relaxed press posture seemed strikingly reminiscent of President
John F. Kennedy, whose image has been all over the tube these last few days in
the sad aftermath of his son's death. Chatterbox, who's had trouble looking at
Bill Clinton on TV for at least a year, found himself .. liking the
president. What's that all about?

            Chatterbox has a hypothesis: President Clinton is easier to like when his
popularity ratings go down.

            According to the Roper Center's Presidential Job Performance Web site, Clinton enjoyed his
highest-ever job approval--73 percent--during December of last year and January
and February of this year. This, of course, was the time of Clinton's
impeachment and Senate trial. Clinton's bad behavior throughout the Flytrap
scandal--especially his smug refusal to confess to perjury during the
impeachment proceedings--made him easy to despise. And yet (no doubt largely
because congressional Republicans were overplaying their hand), the public gave
Clinton more support than had ever been enjoyed by Richard Nixon
(personal best: 67 percent) or even Ronald Reagan (personal best: 68
percent--mass adulation of Ronald Reagan being a largely retrospective
phenomenon). Clinton also hit 73 percent early in 1998, right after Flytrap
broke. In that instance, the public was probably expressing disapproval of the
press.

            As the impeachment drama dissipated, though, and Congress and the press
started to lay off, Clinton's approval rating dropped. Since May, it's been
between 50 and 60 percent. That isn't bad, and it certainly isn't Clinton's
absolute lowest approval rating as president---that would be 1993 and
1994, when Clinton's popularity dropped on several occasions to 37 percent.
Interestingly, this was a period when Chatterbox felt more enthusiastic
about Clinton's presidency than he has ever felt since. Still, in the vast
sweep of history, a 50 to 60 percent approval rating isn't particularly
great--it's about where President Kennedy's lowest job-approval rating
sat. And Clinton's approval rating is higher than the rating for his
policies (an ass-backward situation, in Chatterbox's view, since
Clinton-the-person is usually much easier to hate than
Clinton-the-policymaker). Clinton's explanation for this at yesterday's press
conference, which seemed a bit of a reach, was: "People think things are going
well, but they want a change in policy ... particularly in a dynamic time where
things are changing, you should want continued change."

            But back to Clinton's newfound likability. Chatterbox knows what you're
thinking: Chatterbox is a reporter. Reporters always like to take popular
people down, and they're trained to sympathize with underdogs ("afflict the
comfortable, comfort the afflicted"). Chatterbox will grant that some of this
crude psychology may be at work.

            But part of it was also Clinton's performance. He just seemed more
relaxed yesterday--less of a snake-oil salesman, less apt to be pissed-off by
rude questions, more willing to hit back, but in a good-natured way, and more
confident about his own achievements. Clinton's primary message--don't let the
Republicans spend the surplus on tax cuts--didn't seem all that urgent, since
it's not clear that even the House Republicans have a majority to do
that. But for the first time since Flytrap, Chatterbox felt himself thinking,
possibly against his better judgment, that maybe Clinton wasn't such a bad guy
after all.

         
      
   
