
   
   
      
         
            Gotta Keep 'Em Separated
            

            It's difficult to imagine a working-class radical and avowed atheist even
being elected to Congress in late-20 th -century America, much less
sworn in. I guess we're not quite as modern as some Victorians, although we are
as primitive as others. Remember Tom DeLay's recent tirade against the teaching
of evolution, which he blamed for the shootings in Littleton? Not to mention
the bill passed by the House last month mandating the posting of the Ten
Commandments in public schools. The House recently defeated a resolution
calling for all Americans to abase themselves before God, but not before some
140 members voted for it. Maybe we should replace the Capitol with a revival
tent.

            You can dismiss someone like DeLay as an extremist, but, in the wake of
Littleton, many moderate pundits and politicians who disdain creationism joined
him in decrying the nihilism supposedly engendered by our secular culture. You
and I disagree about the alleged skepticism of the chattering classes. From my
perspective, most professional chatterers today tend to be almost as
deferential to religion as politicians. They may occasionally ponder the
appropriate place of religion in public life, but they rarely, if ever, express
any irreverence toward established religions (although they feel free to mock
New Age). If Gladstones are scarce today, so are Menckens.

            We do agree that the pandering and preaching of politicians is especially
loathsome. I'm afraid, however, that they do find it effective. DeLay and his
comrades on the far right aren't playing to the variegated denominations you
mention; they're playing to their base. People such as Al Gore who aim to
please all of us, or as many as possible, traffic mostly in ecumenical
banalities about the virtue and values of Godliness: Gore talks nonsensically
about parents who "struggle to pass on the right values" to their children. And
he confirms his own religiosity, deploring the "hollow secularism" that
supposedly afflicts the unenlightened. That's probably about the most fire and
brimstone that we'll hear from him. And while it may be foolish to deride
secularism as hollow, it's not particularly risky--not in a nation of
Indians.

            You don't need a crystal ball to know that we are likely to see more
preaching and pandering, not less, as the 2000 election approaches. Having
successfully embraced a Republican agenda on crime control, Democrats are
adopting Republicanesque rhetoric and policies on religion. Indeed, religion is
presented by both parties as an antidote to crime. Al Gore has recently
declared his support for faith-based social services--publicly funded
social-service programs delivered by sectarian institutions--which were
championed by conservative Republican Senator John Ashcroft three years ago and
expressly authorized by the Clinton welfare bill.

            Faith-based social services are all the rage; they're apt to be implemented
widely in the next few years, along with school-voucher programs. So, we're
likely to see an unprecedented diversion of tax dollars to churches, mosques,
and synagogues. I can't wait for Rev. Moon or the next David Koresh to
establish a religious school seeking voucher students or apply for government
funds under a charitable choice provision. Do you think an organization like
the American Center for Law and Justice, which fights for the rights of
Christians, will take on the anti-discrimination suit of a New Age guru denied
a government grant? I suspect that most people support faith-based services
only so long as they support the particular faith delivering the service.

            The challenge for the dwindling ranks of secularists is to convince people
that the separation of church and state is not hostile to religion; it serves
religion, or rather it serves religions. Religious leaders who enjoy tax
exemptions should surely understand that. (And I should make clear that
separationism does not require religious people and religious leaders to
withdraw from the political sphere; it requires government to withhold support
from sectarian activities and keeps government free of sectarian structures.)
Anyway, it should be obvious that secularism makes pluralism possible. That
prohibitions on establishing religion ensure free exercise is such a simple
concept, and yet it's so widely ignored. Sometimes I'm amused by all the
religious posturing, and sometimes I'm quite discouraged.

            Sometimes I put my faith in sectarian rivalries, which helped derail the
most recent proposed school-prayer amendment to the Constitution. Last year, an
organization in Arkansas, Put God Back in Public School, decided not to press
for the introduction of official school prayers in Arkansas (instead, they
demanded state funding for special Christian schools). The group reconsidered
the value of school prayer after its founder, Kathy Smith, consulted with God:
"I asked God, 'Do you want me to change the law to put prayer in the schools?'
He said no. If you do that, kids would have the right to pray to other Gods
too. They could pray to Buddha. God doesn't want that. There is only one
God."

            What more can I say but "Amen."

            P.S.: I'm easy Cullen, anytime you want to have a face to face conversation,
just give me a call.

         
      
   
