
   
   
      
         
            ER: Authoritarian and Aristocratic
            

            Dear Marjorie,

            At the risk of letting you lure me into a very old argument, I'd say Eleanor
was a force for ill. Not great ill, and not unmixed ill, but ill--mostly in
that she helped establish the modern social compact under which citizens trade
freedom (or, as Cook puts it, " 'freedom' ") for security. The balance sheet
gets complicated if you think, as I do, that a lot of her most noble goals
(such as racial integration) would have happened anyway, and consider that a
lot of her least noble ones (such as disarmament on the verge of World War II)
were never achieved.

            What tips the balance for me is that Eleanor was a far more authoritarian
figure than Cook lets on. Granted, paternalism was in the air. Churchill, too,
urged that we "treat the jobless man like a patient in hospital." Cook says
Eleanor resented it when people compared Roosevelt to a dictator and treats all
complaints about Franklin's dictatorial ambitions as cynical rabble-rousing
meant to protect private interests. Maybe at times. But Frank Freidel says
that, in an era that saw the rise of Hitler and Mussolini, fears of Roosevelt
as an elected dictator--while ultimately misplaced--were understandable, even
healthy, in a democracy. He adds that during the Hundred Days, "Mrs. Roosevelt
lamented that the nation lacked a benevolent dictator to force through
reforms."

            Ninety percent of what politicians do is self-actualization. Some make
things better, some make things worse, most do both--but that's a secondary
project. And that's why I don't exactly fault Hillary for her bad luck in
ruling in good times, which makes a lot of her rhetoric, as you say,
inappropriate. She would have been more Eleanor-like during a depression and
Eleanor would have been more Hillary-like during a boom.

            What makes Eleanor's growing love of power so fascinating--and
troublesome--is that it had to be wielded with either extreme ingenuousness or
extreme disingenuousness, and it's hard to figure out which. Eleanor's
instincts were aristocratic. She ushered in (or, more accurately, restored) an
era in which political power was seized not through backroom deals and
exchanges of money but through cause-based kudos-accumulation. The fact that
she gave to charity the millions she made as a radio star does not, to my mind,
exempt her from the charge of Gingrichian buck-raking.

            You cannot lament, as Cook does, "America's stingy attitude toward the
nation's neglected and rejected people" without asking Eleanor to open up her
own books. You cannot carp, as Eleanor did, about privileges of race and gender
without begging the question of your own megaprivileges: land, family,
connections, fame, not to mention having a husband who's president. The
latifundium on the Hudson, the Astor and Morgan relatives Eleanor enlisted to
bankroll her schemes, the yearly visits to Newport (to which Eleanor was
hardly, pace Cook, dragged kicking and screaming), the government and
charity connections that allowed her Val-Kill furniture company to break
even--what would Eleanor have been without them?

            As for money, Eleanor said, "If you could give it all where it would do the
most good that would be grand but we can't always do that!" I'm with her, I'm
with her! But the moment she berates the "privilege" of those who couldn't
afford to make a down payment on her carriage house, or invokes the "greed" of
those making 125 percent of the mean per capita income, I'm with Hick, who said
to Eleanor during a White House dinner, "God damn it--none of us ought to be
wearing velvet dinner gowns these days."

            Best,
Chris

         
      
   
