
   
   
      
         
            ER vs. HRC
            

            Dear Chris,

            To begin with the end of your last entry, I find I have to give you some
ground on Cook's reflexive leftism. It is wrong to equate anti-communism
with opposition to "all public improvements," and Cook does tend to caricature
all anti-communism under the rubric Red Scare. (I can't see Cook's putting
"freedom" in quotes as anything but a perfectly respectable rhetorical device,
though. Are you the same Chris Caldwell whose excellent recent Standard
report on Hillary's Senate campaign included the observation that "most of the
'neighbors' " rustled up for her initial appearance were in fact Democratic
activists?)

            I'm asking myself why I so easily read past all such lefty rhetoric in this
bio; I pretty much took it as a given--like the local weather, as you so nicely
put it--and at least felt that Cook took no pains to conceal her point of view.
I suspect myself of an end-of-history mellowness about it. Which I raise
because it seems to speak to the question of why I come down on the side of
admiring Eleanor but really can't bring myself to like Hillary Clinton.

            Your theory that Eleanor's do-goodism is distinguished from Hillary's by its
"reactive" nature doesn't quite work for me. (Even though Eleanor had a
miserable childhood, I don't buy it as the complete explanation for her empathy
toward the downtrodden. I was as least equally interested in--and impressed
by--Cook's awareness of how much Eleanor came to savor power.) I think it's
more about circumstance: When ER talked about the excitement of forming a new
social order, well, she had a point. Her husband's administration was in the
midst of saving capitalism from itself. And ER was talking about the redress of
some of the more shameful circumstances of pre-war life: lynching, child labor,
total segregation, pervasive poverty. What's not to reorder?

            When Hillary came along, and spoke at a similar rhetorical pitch, she was
talking to a generation of contented fellow boomers, in an era of prosperity,
at a time when social norms have shifted hugely--to the good--in a more
progressive direction. No, the heaven of racial harmony has not been achieved,
and yes, of course any number of social pathologies persist. But Hillary has
always seemed to chide us, as if we were all mossback fat cats of the '30s who
were getting ready to go down to the Trans-Lux and boo Roosevelt (isn't that
how that other great cartoon of the times went?).

            That note in her voice, of the unreconstructed left, is the same one I
pretty much tuned out in reading Cook's bio. I suspect the world is divided
between people who tune it out and people who are driven crazy by it, with a
small remaining percentage who agree with it. (These are the same people who
held rallies to support Clinton during his impeachment and called the House
managers "ayatollahs.") Hillary's success in driving some people crazy with it
is what's made her so darned successful at attracting the right enemies, at
least. But it leaves me--and, polls suggest, the vast majority of my fellow
Americans--wishing a pox on all their houses.

            Still, the parallels between Hillary and Eleanor are irresistibly striking:
A bright, intense young woman marries a profligately charming man who takes her
home to his disapproving mother. She is dashed by his flirtations (and more?)
with other women, but flowers when he runs for office and she discovers her own
skills as a political wife. The higher he rises, the more she uses the role of
spouse (and some apparent sense, within the marriage, that he owes her) to
bring her own agenda to the fore. He needs her to organize him (he's always
late and always talks too long to any gathering) and also to bring in money for
the family (the few years he spends out of office, the practice of law bores
him silly). She gradually finds that her marriage to him allows her to exercise
power in his name that she was never able to claim in her own right.

            But of course the other circumstance that makes the two women different is
that Eleanor really had no initial way of claiming power for herself, whereas
Hillary could have launched her own political career decades ago, instead of
offering us that unnerving two-for-the-price-of-one arrangement. This is a big
reason why people mistrust Hillary, whereas it made a lot of sense to people,
in the '30s, that ER should be a kind of shape-shifting adjunct to her husband.
(Not, as indicated above, that ER was innocent of personal ambition. "How I
hate doing these things and then they say someday I'll run for an office," she
complained. "Well, I'd have to be chloroformed first!" Sure, sure ...)

            But I've saved the most important thing for last: How could you say that ER
was not a force for good? Do you think she was the opposite, or not a force of
any kind?

            Best,
Marjorie

         
      
   
