
   
   
      
         
            Not a Denny Less

            The Washington Post , Los Angeles
Times , and New York Times lead
with a story that's been cooking for days: passage of a $792 billion tax cut by
the House of Representatives. The bill would pare personal income tax rates by
10 percent over the next 10 years, reduce the "marriage penalty" and the
highest rate on capital gains from 20 percent to 15 percent, and repeal the tax
on health insurance and large inheritances. The papers concur that the plan has
zilch chance of actually becoming law--President Clinton has already promised
not to sign it--and that it merely represents an opening gambit in the upcoming
back-and-forth over what to do with the surplus.

            The reports agree that this a key victory for House Speaker Denny Hastert,
who cajoled his fractious and narrow majority--including a cadre of moderates
skittish about using so much of the surplus for tax cuts--into supporting the
legislation. Hastert wooed party moderates by agreeing to postpone the tax cut
if the government's interest rate on the national debt climbs (the papers call
this stipulation a sham; no one understands how it would actually work, and it
is unlikely to survive in the Senate). The WP 's ticktock account of
Hastert's vote campaign proposes that the bill ultimately passed because "just
about every Republican wants Hastert to succeed." After the bill scored enough
votes to win, GOP members cheered, "Coach! Coach! Coach!"

            The Wall Street
Journal 's "Washington Wire" column ticks off the legislation's many
concessions to special interest groups. Investmentmeister Warren Buffett
persuaded Sen. Bob Kerrey to up the limit on how many bequeathed publicly
traded shares a private foundation can own in a single company, while Rep.
Jennifer Dunn worked on behalf of retail outlets to ensure that their
incentives to build in shopping malls wouldn't be taxed heavily.

            All papers front the Chinese government's ban of the spiritual organization
Falun Gong (sometimes known as Falun Dafa). Followers are, says the NYT ,
largely "middle-aged people who practice a form of Chinese breathing exercises
and meditation," but they are organized enough to engineer what the
WSJ calls "the largest expression of public discontent with the
government since the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests." The NYT waits
until the 22nd paragraph of its story to explain why Beijing is so spooked by
the mystics: Similar groups destabilized the last imperial dynasty, and China
fears that Falun Gong could organize China's huge numbers of newly laid-off
state employees. The WSJ points out that Falun Gong's estimated 40
million members make it a close second in membership to the Chinese Communist
Party's 55 million.

            The other unanimously fronted story is the House's denial of funding for the
Air Force's super-pricey F-22 fighters, already being prepped for production at
a Lockheed Martin warehouse. Each plane cost $200 million, and Lockheed Martin
is reeling from the loss of the sale. The WP attributes the decision to
cost worries, as well as tension between the White House and Capitol Hill on
all matters military.

            A NYT front-pager and a WP inside piece report on George W.
Bush's first significant policy speech, which laid out a scheme to fund social
services through private charity. Bush proposed spending $8 billion--or, as the
WP reminds, 10 percent of the non-Social Security budget surplus-on tax
incentives designed to stimulate contributions to nonprofits and religious
groups. The WP calls Bush's proposals the first real glimpse of the face
of "compassionate conservatism" and an unmistakable rejection of Republican
"free-market libertarian orthodoxy." His programs surely would work if other
citizens are as generous as his supporters: Despite his speaking in ground zero
of Quayle territory, Bush carted home a one-night haul of at least
$600,000.

            The WSJ reports that despite Al Gore's avid technophilia, Bill
Bradley is outpacing him in Silicon Valley contributors, with George W. Bush a
close second. High-tech titans admire Bradley's nuanced grasp of financial
esoterica and support for free trade. Meanwhile, Gore's stock suffers from his
tight associations with tort lawyers, who often bring stockholder suits against
startups when their stock tanks.

            Need a mate? A WSJ piece quotes friendly-sounding singles ads,
complete with descriptions like "Looking for a playmate?" "full of energy and
spunk," and "a real ladies man." But don't respond unless you're ready to get
down on four legs; the ads feature dogs in need of a home.

         
      
   
