
   
   
      
         
            You Can Lead a Kid to Bacon ...
            

            Dear Steve,

            You're right, we began somber and became silly, which is a fair
representation of my breakfast table--I'm thinking of the morning
trajectory from stumbling glumly downstairs to fighting over the comics, except
that around my table the only audible dialogue is generally, "You done with
those yet?" punctuated by the clank of spoon against cereal bowl. There was a
phase a while back when I filled with resolve, for reasons then unclear to
myself but transparent to any female who has ever cracked the pages of a
McCall's or Family Circle , to cook hot meals at breakfast. I had
in mind the sort that appeared in magazines, with the little wisps of steam
visible as the plates were lowered to the table. I made muffins, or scrambled
eggs with green chiles and cheddar cheese, or crepes rolled around blackberry
jam, or whole-wheat pancakes with peanut-butter chips (I know, this sort of
fits into the category of manteca en su bolsillo , but they're actually
pretty good). There was a lot of bacon, too. Something elemental about bacon:
the smell, I think. Also good sound effects. My kids looked startled at first,
large plates of steaming food at 7 a.m.--What is going on around here? Is Mom
OK? Maybe better not ask. Then there was a Mom's Cafe phase: "Oh, look, it's
breakfast at the Mom's Cafe."

            Then my daughter got up the nerve to say: Um, this is nice but you know I
really like Crispix. My son, who had rattled both of his deeply secular
parents a few years earlier by requesting a bar mitzvah (for which, to our
astonishment, he studied intently for two years, delivering himself of a
whomping cantor-led performance and bar mitzvah speech in which he discussed in
serious 13-year-old voice his intense feeling about carrying on a tradition his
father's family had let lapse), told me kindly one day that he had stopped
eating pork so maybe I could cut back on the bacon. My husband, in the
interests of middle-aged guy health, dropped eggs and muffins from his diet. So
that was that for the wisps of steam at our breakfast table. The Crispix came
back in force; in fact, the last time I was at the supermarket, the checker
gazed at my overflowing cart and said: "Lot of cereal eaters in your house, are
there?"

            I do have one more somber thought, though, because I really am troubled
about this, even though I can see no way to let off even a tiny rant without
personally contributing to the very problem of which I speak: I do believe the
press, and in particular the broadcast press, took leave of its collective
senses last weekend when that little plane disappeared--surely not the first
time such a thing has happened, but I am afraid that the net result, following
day after day of relentless, nonstop, overblown, breathless, self-referential,
nearly entirely content-free coverage, has been the transformation of a single
publicly shared tragedy into something venomous. I think people are just
furious at the coverage. I think fury at the coverage has in some measure
replaced what might have been a brief period of honorable,
modestly-proportioned mourning for some famous people who died. I think we'll
be hearing about this for quite a while, and that the demonstrably low public
regard for reporters and commentators will dip still lower in the wake of this
past week. I know, we do this all the time, we did it when Diana died, and we
will surely do it again--but it seems mysterious to me that in the first year
post-Monica, when so many reporters looked back in embarrassment and agreed
that events and group-think had sucked us into dreadful vacuous coverage from
which we felt unable to extricate ourselves, the same blind terror of losing
audience share could have overtaken assignment editors again.

            So that is my closing rant. I'm afraid the only journal in our house that
for interest factor can be rated anywhere near your Journal of Inconspicuous
Consumption is our full-color glossy monthly called Lowrider , which
was given to my son--no, not himself a lowrider, his only available vehicle is
the denuded Toyota van--as a Christmas present last year. I have actually
become quite fascinated by this magazine and was going to dig out the latest
issue to report on exactly which babes in bikini tops and pachuco pants
were jutting their hips out beside which gleaming, curvaceous, cherried-out
20-ton American car. But it seems I was overcome by feminist bile one morning
and tossed it. Pity. I bet Lowrider is a hit in Austin. And is now the
time to say I can hardly wait for your impending new novel about the Alamo?

            It's been swell, Steve, but do something about that lard in your pocket,
OK?

            Yr faithful correspondent,
CG

         
      
   
