
   
   
      
         
            The State of the Glass Ceiling
            

            Last week's hiring of Carly Fiorina as CEO of Hewlett-Packard is one of the
few unequivocally good things to happen anywhere in the world--okay, how about
"in the upper reaches of corporate America"--in recent months. For H-P,
Fiorina's arrival will bring some much-needed new blood into a somewhat tired
and overly bureaucratic organization, as well as a welcome emphasis on Internet
commerce. For Fiorina, who had had a stellar career at Lucent, the hiring means
that she'll get a shot at running a major corporation years before she could
have expected to get the top job at her old company. And for the rest of us, at
least the rest of us who worry about who's running American business, it's
excellent finally to have a woman CEO of a Dow corporation.

            Unfortunately, though not surprisingly, Fiorina has taken pains to downplay
the last fact. It's understandable that she doesn't want it to look as if she
was hired because she was a woman (although the fact that she'd be worried
about anyone thinking that in a world in which only three of the Fortune 500
corporations are run by women is somewhat astonishing). So we'll stipulate that
she was not hired because she was a woman. She was hired because she's a
managerial whiz who helped transform Lucent from a staid spin-off of AT&T
into a prototypical bleeding-edge company. But that doesn't mean that the fact
that she is a woman is therefore irrelevant.

            The irony is that when Fiorina says things like "there really is not a glass
ceiling anymore," she's simultaneously making too much and too little of her
own accomplishment. She's making too much of it because of her implicit
argument that her ascension has smashed the ceiling. But the reality is that
most doors into the executive suite are still not open to women, and those that
are have been opened only through struggle. Something like 95 percent of all
top executive positions are still held by men. There are lots of reasons for
that, of course, and most of them have to do with broader social realities and
not with corporate prejudice. But the old-boys' network is not a myth, and it
still takes a conscious effort on the part of boards of directors and hiring
committees to promote women. (It may be telling, in fact, that New Economy
companies have done a much better job in this regard.) It's hardly a
coincidence that Hewlett-Packard, which has a number of women executives in
positions of real authority, was the first Dow company ever to hire a female
CEO. Under outgoing head Lew Platt, H-P has emphasized diversity. Which, again,
doesn't mean that Fiorina wasn't the right choice. It just means that there's
an institutional environment that allowed that choice to be made.

            On the other hand, Fiorina is making too little of her accomplishment
because she's downplaying just how talented she had to be to rise as fast as
she has and to overcome all the lingering prejudices against women executives,
especially in the old-line technology industry. (Needless to say, any time a
CEO downplays her own talent, it's nice, but still ...) It's like Jackie
Robinson. The first black major-leaguer had to be exceptional, because a merely
good player wouldn't have been able to convince people of what they didn't want
to be convinced of, namely, that black players could play. In some ways, in
fact, you could say that major league baseball wasn't really integrated until
the Boston Red Sox--the last team to integrate--signed Pumpsie Green, a
mediocre-hitting utility infielder. When companies start being run by the
female equivalents of Pumpsie--as most companies currently are by the male
equivalents--then we'll know that the glass ceiling is really gone.

            Of course, in theory the market should already have taken care of this.
Discrimination is economically irrational, which means that companies which
discriminate against women should feel the pain in reduced competitiveness. But
we know that companies do discriminate even when it costs them. As my friend
Rachel Devlin, a historian at Tulane University, points out, after World War II
most industrial companies fired the women workers in their plants, even though
they would work for less than men, in order to restore the status quo that had
prevailed before the war.

            In any case, when it comes to the CEO market in particular, it's difficult
to decide what constitutes "rationality" because the selection process is so
personalized and because the criteria for what constitutes a great CEO are so
ill-defined. As the sky-high pay for today's CEOs compared with their
counterparts of twenty years ago demonstrates, the insular nature of boards of
directors means that purely economic considerations do not always prevail. And
in that sense, worrying too much about why Fiorina was hired is fruitless.
What's important is that she was hired and that if she's successful she'll make
it easier for those after her. Even, or rather especially, those who are more
Pumpsie Green than Jackie Robinson.

         
      
   
