
   
   
      
         
            Repairing China

            Both the New York Times and
Los
Angeles Times lead with the first high-level encounter between the U.S.
and China--a lunch meeting in Singapore between China's foreign minister and
Madeleine Albright--since NATO's bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade.
Diplomacy also leads at the Washington Post , which stuffs the Albright meeting, but
goes with the impromptu talks between new Israeli P.M. Ehud Barak and the new
president of Algeria, Abdelaziz Bouteflika; and between Barak, Yasser Arafat,
and President Clinton at the funeral of Morocco's King Hassan, a story the
other majors run inside. USA Today leads with a story also fronted by the
LAT , the arrest of a man in last week's Yosemite National Park murder of
a naturalist, a man the FBI is saying is also a suspect in the February murder
there of three other women.

            The two Times agree that Albright's luncheon with her Chinese
counterpart is a hopeful lift in what has been a difficult patch with China,
especially given that it resulted in the two announcing that President Clinton
will meet with President Jiang Zemin in New Zealand in the fall, a nice change
from just after the embassy bombing, when, notes the NYT , Jiang wouldn't
take a Clinton phone call. A key ingredient in the upswing is that Albright
emphasized that the U.S. doesn't endorse Taiwan's recent attempts to depart
from the "one China" policy. The only real difference between the two accounts
is that the LAT stresses remaining strains in the relationship a bit
more, noting this in the big type of its headline, and also mentions the
spurning of Albright's requests for renewed visits to China by U.S. naval
vessels and for resuming talks regarding the nonproliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.

            The LAT fronts the follow-on to a story the paper led with last week:
The U.S. and Vietnam agreed Sunday to normalize trade relations, thus marking
the real end of the Vietnam War. The paper says both sides were "ecstatic." The
paper says U.S. diplomats don't anticipate much trouble in gaining
congressional approval.

            A NYT front-pager reports that because so many members of the House
and Senate now have personal experience with the difficulties posed by aging,
infirm parents and other relatives, the issue of how to help alleviate the cost
of long-term care for the elderly and disabled is at last becoming part of
Congress' agenda. "Until you've gone through something, you don't really
understand it," is how Rep. Richard Gephardt explains the change to the
Times . Hmmm ... so maybe what this country also needs is for more
politicians to have family members who can't get drug rehabilitation treatment
or day care or who end up on the wrong end of a handgun.

            A Wall Street Journal front-page feature notes a way
corporate America is bucking the general trend against affirmative action: The
business group that certifies minority ownership of corporations is likely to
drop its definition from 51 percent ownership by minority group members to 20
percent. The story notes two overriding factors behind the trend: 1)
Corporations are slashing their suppliers down to a handful of giants, which
would, under the present rules, automatically exclude virtually all
minority-controlled companies; and 2) the clout of minority consumers has grown
and therefore companies want to be able to undertake 1) without losing the
chance to establish a minority-friendly track record. But isn't this sort of
like becoming more attractive to investors by weakening the definition of
profitability?

            Ex-Reagan defense official Lawrence Korb points out in an NYT op-ed
that the vote the other day to deny money to the F-22 doesn't, despite many
headlines, actually kill the plane. That's because, he explains, the money that
was turned down was only for producing the first block of aircraft next year.
$1.2 billion in R and D for the plane was left untouched, and Korb notes that
this sort of pot has been used in the past to resuscitate killed or virtually
killed aircraft such as the B-1 and B-2 bombers and the Osprey tilt rotor
aircraft. If politicians want to really kill a weapon, they need, Korb points
out, to do what Bush Defense Secretary Dick Cheney did to bury (the
runaway-expensive) A-12--take away all its funding.

            The LAT 's recent addition of a reader's representative is starting to
pay off. Sunday's column from her gives readers an inside look at how the
LAT failed to cover a demonstration of 6,000 Iranians in L.A: When one
of the protest's organizers called, he was transferred three times and then
apparently none of the three faxes he sent got through. The sole Iranian
reporter at the paper, an intern, knew in advance of the demonstration, but
assumed the city desk would already know about it. Just getting the snafu story
out there will make both the paper and its readers more aware of what needs to
be done to avoid this sort of mistake in the future.

            Back to USAT 's account of the arrest of the suspect in the Yosemite
cases. His crucial misstep appears to have been a profound failure to blend in.
He was "arrested Saturday, fully clothed, at a nudist colony near
Sacramento."

         
      
   
