
   
   
      
         
            Short End of the Stick for Hick
            

            Dear Chris,

            Thanks for your excellent recap of Eleanor, Volume 2 . I'd probably
quarrel with some of your emphases--and certainly with the strength of that
adjective, "irresponsible." I did think you unfair in characterizing it as
"Whig History for the PC era, full of paeans to same-sex love," and so on. You
especially underrate Cook's careful narrative of ER's emotional life, in
suggesting that her bio is given to "sweeping generalizations about emotional
needs."

            But you touched unerringly on all the elements of ER's life that give Cook's
work its fascination. I found her portrait of the Roosevelt marriage in most
ways rich, in other ways frustrating. She's definitely broken new ground in
establishing how thoroughly bifurcated their extended family was--Franklin's
circle/Eleanor's circle, Franklin's place (Warm Springs)/Eleanor's places
(Val-Kill and Campobello), Franklin's surrogate spouses (Lucy Mercer and Missy
LeHand)/Eleanor's surrogate spouses (one-time state trooper and bodyguard Earl
Miller and Lorena Hickok). That the Roosevelts managed to keep all these plates
in the air, while also raising five children and sharing the presidency of the
United States, is just another big reminder that any one marriage is a stranger
and more mysterious land than an outsider can possibly know.

            That it wasn't easy is suggested by the jealousies that bordered their
arrangements: Woe betide anyone (with the possible exception of Louis Howe) who
tried to befriend Eleanor and Franklin equally. Eleanor's friends--even the
lesbian ones--occasionally made the mistake of falling for Franklin's easy
charms. In Volume 1 , Cook wonderfully described two of them, Marion
Dickerman and Nancy Cook, as beginning a "slow slide toward that dangerous
abyss they considered neutrality." But this leads me to what I found a bit
frustrating. Cook by no means ignores what was difficult about the Roosevelt
marriage, but I think she minimizes it, or rather that her awareness of it
seems to come and go. On the one hand, she writes that

            
                in relation to Franklin, ER still occupied a lonely sphere which
echoed the isolation of her childhood. Beyond the First Family's jolly facade,
ER endured a lifelong sense of exclusion that represented for her an ongoing
humiliation regarding FDR's domain.
            

             But in between such acknowledgments that ER's independent life began as an
accommodation to the deep pain FDR's philandering caused her, Cook tends to
present their domestic life as a settled, deeply fond, mutually beneficial
arrangement. I'm sure that there's realism in this portrait--a long marriage is
never all amity or all its opposite. But somehow I thought that Cook didn't
manage to keep the mixedness of it in focus as well in this volume as
she did in the last one.

            Is this because it's so hard to admit that Eleanor's strengths came in part
from being married to an impossible (in the marital sense) man? Cook did a
great job in Volume 1 of demonstrating how flawed Franklin was as a
husband; how he relinquished all control to his mother and absented himself
from the brutal conflicts that resulted between ER and her mother-in-law.
Grrrrrr. But it isn't very satisfying to say that Eleanor Roosevelt became a
great woman mostly by making the best of a bad business, is it?

            I'm entirely fascinated by the Hickok material in this volume. You're right
that "Hick" is a sympathetic character--and in many ways a sad one. Cook is
entirely hip to the irony of their relationship: Just as Eleanor was coming to
the full command of her own powers, poor Hick (who quit the AP over the
conflict of interest posed by her personal ties to ER) was pining away over
having given up the career that had lifted her out of poverty and brought her
every good thing in her life up to the time she met ER. It's ugly to watch ER's
rather man-like collusion in this process; with her advantages of class and
marriage, she couldn't begin to imagine what Hick had sacrificed for her.

            I didn't find it paradoxical that Cook insists on the centrality of
Eleanor's lesbianism. And actually, "insists" is not the right word. What she
does is assume the centrality of it, for the most part, and leave the
reader to puzzle out what it means. I think Cook made quite a canny--and
possibly political--decision to be so matter-of-fact about the lesbianism of
Eleanor's circle. It leaves us readers to grapple with our own reactions.
( You mean the first lady was tooling around the U.S. on vacation in an open
convertible with her lesbian lover? And she got away with it? Isn't that kind
of... wild?? )

            Some other things I'd like to touch on this week: Did the bifurcated
Roosevelt White House do a disservice in providing a model for later
administrations, in which poor folks and children and the lame and the halt
were insidiously sentimentalized as women's work? (See Barbara Bush.) And of
course, the Clinton parallel ... but we'll need at least a whole day just for
that. If Eleanor Roosevelt was a force for good, as I definitely believe, then
why does Hillary Clinton drive me mad?

            Best,

            Marjorie

            P.S.: A personal aside: Your allusion to Earl Browder fell wide of the
polemical mark with me, because I actually lived next door to Earl Browder as a
child. His son Bill was a professor in the Princeton math department, and his
granddaughter Julie was my best friend. So I knew Browder as a somewhat gloomy
but kind old gent who took a daily constitutional up the block to Nassau
street, where he would buy me and Julie a package of Hostess cupcakes--the
orange-flavored ones, with icing squiggles on top.

             

             

         
      
   
