
   
   
      
         
            Congress: Full of Cap

            The Washington Post leads with Congress' steady circumvention
of the 1997 budget-balancing caps. The New York Times
goes with a story the others run inside: the EPA's imminent recommendation that
Congress revoke rules it passed in 1990 requiring all oil companies to include
an oxygenate additive in gasoline, on the EPA's grounds that at least one such
additive, a possible carcinogen, while promoting cleaner combustion, is
polluting groundwater. The Los Angeles Times goes with the latest on the
Yosemite murders: the apparent confession by the suspect. And USA Today ,
which led with that story yesterday, goes instead with the Midwest heat wave
that has killed 23 since last weekend. Most of the dead, the story says high
up, were sick and elderly, but the story's very last sentence reveals that two
were children left in cars.

            The WP lead explains that the House's main tack for nominally obeying
the budget caps while proposing both a tax cut and more money for key domestic
programs is to declare monies actually going for routine annual expenses to be
"emergency" funding, which the caps don't constrain. Some recent examples of
such "emergencies": medical services for veterans and the census. The paper
calls this a "backdoor method."

            The NYT lead points out that in the past, the EPA has defended the
additives against those fearing health risks. But, the paper adds, newer car engines can
control carbon monoxide emissions without oxygenates. The paper says substances
are now showing up in 5-10 percent of drinking water "supplies." (Which are
what, exactly? Does this mean in 5-10 percent of our drinking water or not?)
One break: The most dangerous additive smells so bad when it's present in
water, that most people refuse to drink it.

            The LAT says the Yosemite suspect, a wilderness buff who had been
previously questioned by the authorities and then dropped, gave a full account
of the murders of four women to a top FBI investigator. The paper adds that in
a jailhouse interview Monday night, he told a TV reporter that he had dreamed
about killing women for 30 years. The suspect had previously hidden evidence
from investigators but had also written them an anonymous letter leading them
to a body they couldn't find.

            The up-tick in the Middle East continues as the LAT fronts and the
NYT stuffs the news that the head of the Palestinian Authority's
legislature visited Israel's Knesset on Monday, becoming the highest ranking
Palestinian to do so. (A trip of but 8.5 miles, the LAT informs.) The
NYT piece mentions that two right-wing members of Israel's parliament
"did a little pro forma heckling" but otherwise, "barely a peep of protest
could be heard." The LAT story gives one of those heckling legislators
several paragraphs and quotes one of his heckles, leaving the reader with an
impression of more discord.

            The papers report that the U.S. announced Monday it is pledging an
additional $500 million in humanitarian assistance to Kosovo, thus raising the
total U.S. commitment there to $800 million. One piece of perspective missing
from all the stories: None mention the size of the U.S. foreign aid budget, or
the amounts of humanitarian aid this country has sent to say, Rwanda.

            The WP 's E.J. Dionne's column on the tax-cut debate trots out an
important fact: three-quarters of all taxpayers pay more in payroll taxes than
in income taxes. In other words, the folks who have benefited least from the
upswing in salaries or the stock market also benefit least from the Republican
tax stance. An important piece in last Sunday's NYT makes a similar
point about the House GOP's beloved estate-tax cut. Citing an article out
yesterday in the policy journal Tax Notes , the Times noted that
under current law, only the wealthiest two percent of Americans even pay estate
tax, and the average tax rate on estates of between $600,000 and $1 million is
6 percent. Not to mention that the tax's floor moves up to an estate value of
$4.5 million if there's a business involved, and $7.4 million if there's a
farm. One question about the piece: Why did it run on Page 16?

            Both the LAT and the NYT front pictures of the aftermath of
the looting and arson rampage that wound up Woodstock '99. The accounts in both papers steer pretty
clear of sociological explanations--the only reason for the anomie that's
discussed seems to be $4 bottles of water and $6 pretzels. And there's no
discussion of the total dollar amount of the damage. This is not the standard
newspaper practice regarding riots. Does the once-over lightly have anything to
do with the festival's virtually all white attendance?

            A WP reader notes that in the paper's recent reprise of three
20-year-old stories about Skylab, none of the stories gave the same weight for
the space craft. Although the letter writer was being critical of the paper's
reporters, the episode probably left him with an improved appreciation of their
job: He notes that finding out Skylab's weight took him nine phone calls.

         
      
   
