
   
   
      
         
            Slick Hustlers and Yahoo Spectacles
            

            Dear Mim:

            No, I don't think I'm being too hard on Miramax and their behavior regarding
Dogma . I can appreciate that Miramax bosses Bob and Harvey Weinstein
made a pragmatic move to ensure the film was seen, Disney wasn't embarrassed,
and the Catholic League could go away feeling that it had achieved something. I
know the Weinstein boys probably brokered the best possible compromise, and
that it's a classic Sun Su tactic to allow the enemy to withdraw without loss
of face, but, for me, it's a "don't ask, don't tell" solution. On prior
restraint, I fear I'm a bloody-minded absolutist. Prior restraint is a secular
sin, so no more compromise; rip away the Wizard of Oz curtains on all
these pressure groups. While I have no information on Bill Donohue and his
cohorts, all too often what's revealed is an unappetizing confederacy of rabid
bigots and slick hustlers with mailing lists who know funds can be extracted
from the demented to attack everything from Tom Sawyer to Teletubbies.

            On the death penalty, I am also an absolutist. If a nation cannot aspire to
a higher moral standard than its killers, it can only be labeled as barbaric.
An eye for an eye is the cry of the savage, and neither revenge nor the
extermination of the socially unmanageable can ever be a civilized objective.
I'm not sure capital punishment is against any Church doctrine, however. I
believe that St. Augustine OK'd it in the fifth century at about the same time
as he invented the concept of a "just war." That it is practiced so gleefully
in this country and is the parrot shriek of the macho political opportunist
sickens me, and yet moral reasoning seems to have no effect. Standing outside
San Quentin with a candle also appears wholly ineffective. My feeling is that
maybe executions should be televised in prime time, and let everyone see what's
being done in their name. If we are so horrified by the cruel and unusual that
we demand repeal of all death-penalty statutes, then hope is possible. If the
process of slaughter becomes a savage yahoo spectacle, then we are indeed
barbaric. I recall in England, when I was growing up, it took the proved
hanging of the wrong man on two separate occasions, plus the execution of an
attractive young woman after a tabloid-sensational, lovers-quarrel murder trial
finally to turn public opinion.

            We seem to have come a long way from Buffy the Vampire Slayer in 24
hours.

            Much love,
Mick

         
      
   
