
   
   
      
         
            Apostrophe S

            The House Republicans' passage of a health-insurance
bill leads at the New York Times and is atop the
Wall Street Journal 's "Worldwide" box. (The
Washington Post , which usually plays up
Capitol Hill intrigue, reefers this story.) The GOP's response to George W.
Bush's criticisms of it on Tuesday is the lead at USA Today and the top non-local story at the Post . The Los Angeles
Times leads with the National Football League's decision to pass over
the City of Angels and put an expansion team in Houston instead. (This story is
put above the fold by USAT and reefered by the
NYT and Post .) A
Houston billionaire offered over $700 million for the team--the highest price
ever paid for a pro sports franchise--plus a publicly financed, $300 million
glass-walled stadium with a retractable roof.

            The $50 billion (over 10 years) health-insurance bill
would, among other things, a) accelerate the 100 percent tax deduction for the
self-employed, b) expand the availability of tax-free accounts for medical
payments, and c) create tax deductions for long-term-care insurance. The
Democrats said the bill would help only 1 percent of the population, and
President Clinton threatened to veto it in its present form. But the main event
is today, when the House votes on competing "patient rights" bills, which would
allow customers to sue their HMOs. (On Tuesday, the House leadership for the
first time threw its weight behind a limited right to sue--see yesterday's TP for
details.)

            All the papers, save the LAT , run follow-ups to George W. Bush's rebuke of congressional
Republicans on Tuesday. Gary Bauer, Steve Forbes, and some Hill Republicans
accused Bush of abandoning the GOP rank and file, and Bush backtracked
slightly, stressing that the GOP's image as heartless was a Democratic
caricature, not reality. USAT calls the GOP
response a "backlash" against Bush, but the other papers are more favorable to
him. The NYT story stresses the inability of
congressional Republicans to soften their image post-Newt Gingrich; the
Post notes that Bush's policy positions are
still solidly conservative, despite Bauer's and Forbes' assertions to the
contrary; and the Journal calls Bush's Tuesday
remarks his "Sister Souljah moment"--referring to candidate Clinton's
successful 1992 strategy of distancing himself from his party's ideological
base. (For Ballot Box's take on the Bush-GOP brouhaha, click here.)
            

            The LAT fronts the FBI's
disclosure that the computer networks of the Pentagon, Energy Department, NASA,
and of defense contractors have undergone a year of extensive, coordinated
cyberattacks from overseas computers--some from Moscow. The hackers have stolen
unclassified but sensitive information on weapons research. One thing holding
up effective countermeasures, the Post writes, is a culture clash between low-tech
FBI agents and the geeky computer consultants helping them with encryption.

            Following up on a Journal
story yesterday, the NYT reports that a diet pill company is using a
Web
site to broadcast an ABC News interview of its chief executive
before ABC has aired the program in which the
interview will be used. (Companies often make their own tapes of their
interviews with the press.) Metabolife International Inc. says that after
discovering the Web site of ABC interviewer Arnold Diaz (titled "Schemes, Scams, and Savin' a Buck"), it began
to suspect that ABC's report will be unfair to its product, so it released the
entire interview on the Internet as part of a counteroffensive. Today's Papers
envisions a world in which every interview subject is his own media watchdog;
when a reporter quotes him out of context, the subject need not beg an editor
or producer for space or time to respond--he can simply publish the unedited
interview himself.

            The Journal notes the
demise of a hallowed cultural institution: the wedding-night consummation.
These days, half of all couples live together before marriage, and less than
one-fifth are virgins on their wedding night. As a result, many
newlyweds--one-third of 18-to-24-year-olds and half of those over 40--would
rather spend their wedding night engaged in non-connubial activities like
partying with wedding guests visiting from afar. "Sex, when it happens" for
newlyweds, reports the Journal , "is often an
apostrophe, not an exclamation point."

         
      
   
