
   
   
      
         
            Of Nukes and Bras

            The New York Times leads with
Senate politicking over the nuclear test ban treaty. The Los Angeles Times
goes with the mounting toll from flooding and landslides in Mexico this week, a
story the Washington Post fronts and the NYT reefers. The WP
leads locally, reporting that charter schools in D.C. are among the most
popular in the nation. After three years in existence, charters already enroll
nearly ten percent of the District's public school students.

            Senators from both parties agree it's unlikely President Clinton will be
able to muster the two-thirds majority needed to approve the Comprehensive Test
Ban Treaty. The question now is whether Majority Leader Trent Lott, a vocal
opponent of the pact, will be able to bring it to a vote early this week and
embarrass Clinton with a defeat. The president hopes to persuade moderate
Republicans, who largely dislike the treaty but are reluctant to vote it down
because they fear that action would make the U.S. look weak abroad, to put off
considering the ban for up to a year. A vote to delay needs only a simple
majority, so Clinton and Democratic senators are looking for six Republican
defectors.

            Floods and mudslides have killed more than 250 in central Mexico after five
days of record-breaking rain, according to the LAT 's lead. President
Ernesto Zedillo calls it "the tragedy of the decade for Mexico." The
WP --which puts the death toll at 330 despite an earlier deadline than
the LAT 's--reports from the hard-hit town of Teziutlan, where at least
72 residents were killed Tuesday afternoon when a terraced block of concrete
houses slid down a mountainside.

            The WP 's off-lead reports on an upcoming battle in Congress on the
future of stem-cell research, a promising but highly controversial form of
medical exploration that draws material from human embryos and aborted fetuses.
Scientists predict that stem cells may provide the building blocks for
treatments to ailments from Parkinson's disease to diabetes. In their calls for
more stem-cell money, they're backed by patient groups but opposed by
right-to-life advocates. The House will take up the question Monday.

            The NYT fronts some good news for AT&T: The Federal
Communications Commission voted Friday to relax rules on how much of the cable
industry a single company can legally control. In its second ruling this week
smiling on corporate consolidation, the FCC said that because companies have
begun offering new kinds of service over cable wire--namely high-speed Internet
access and local telephone service--competition will be bolstered by changing
the ownership laws, not stifled. The decision means that AT&T's recent
purchase of the Media One Group can go forward without the telephone giant
having to sell off other cable properties.

            Also on the NYT 's front is the news that the computer industry may
soon have trouble keeping up with Moore's Law, the oft-cited rule maintaining
that computing power doubles every 18 months. In an article in the journal
Science , an Intel scientist named Paul A. Packan reports that as silicon
chips continue to shrink, their manufacturers are running up against stubborn
physical limits for the first time--already, the smallest transistors have
insulating layers only a few atoms thick.

            An LAT front-pager tells of growing cracks in the Reform Party's
façade. Disunity and chaos were the order of the week for the R.P. Minnesota
Gov. Jesse Ventura watched his approval rating plummet 20 points--and heard
calls that he should resign from the party--after the publication of a
Playboy interview in which he ridiculed organized religion and said he
wouldn't mind being reborn as an extra-large bra. And the party's faithful are
now confronted with the possibility that three very different candidates will
jockey for the Reform presidential nomination: Donald Trump, Pat Buchanan, and
Warren Beatty. (Two of those might have something to say on the bra issue.)

            The WP fronts a report that early campaign-trail promises by Al Gore
and Bill Bradley, if enacted, would eat up nearly all of the projected $1.1
trillion government surplus over the next ten years. Bradley has made the
costlier pledges so far: his ambitious universal health-care initiative would
by itself use the entire surplus, according to some estimates. Gore's spending
plans include tax cuts up to $150 billion, universal preschool, and his own
more modest health-care package.

            
               NYT op-ed columnist Frank Rich, who reported on his share of
culture-war skirmishes as the paper's chief theater critic in the 1980s and
early '90s, weighs in on the controversy surrounding the Brooklyn Museum's
week-old exhibit "Sensation." Rich casts New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani--who has
threatened to shut down the exhibit of work by a group of young British artists
because he thinks it's full of anti-Catholic, "sick stuff"--as a schoolyard
tough who likes to pick on scrawny opponents. "Could it be that the Brooklyn,"
Rich asks, "a struggling museum in an outer borough, is easier to bully than a
Manhattan cultural mecca with a heavy-hitting board bulging with Giuliani fat
cats?"

         
      
   
