
   
   
      
         
            Torts-R-Us

            Torts dominate the news, with major liability decisions about health
insurance, pharmaceuticals, and the manufacture of guns covering the front
pages. Everyone leads with the House's dramatic, bipartisan passage of a
"patients' rights" bill, which would give the consumer a broad right to sue his
HMO for lack of coverage or substandard coverage. (This story gets three
columns in both Times es and four in the Washington Post .) The
New York Times
and USA Today
front one of the nation's largest product-liability settlements: American Home
Products has agreed to pay an inflation-adjusted $3.75 billion dollars (over 16
years) to thousands of consumers of fen-phen, the miracle weight-loss drug
banned for damaging heart valves. (This story is reefered by the Los Angeles Times and runs
atop the Wall Street
Journal 's "Business and Finance" box.) USAT and the
LAT front a state judge's dismissal of
Cincinnati's lawsuit against gun manufacturers--one of 29 similar suits by
cities against the firearms industry. The judge said the attempt to regulate
guns through tort law represented an "improper attempt to have this court
substitute its judgment for that of the legislature."

            The "patients' rights" bill passed 275-151 (with 68 Republican defections)
in one of the rare House votes where the outcome was not known in advance. It
dealt a major blow to the House leadership, which had lobbied for a narrower
right-to-sue bill, defeated earlier in the day. The NYT quotes 44-year House veteran and co-sponsor John Dingell, D-Mich.,
calling the bill "as fine a piece of work as I've ever seen in Congress." The
legislation was supported by the labor and consumer lobbies as well as the
American Medical Association, and fought by insurance and business groups, who
argued it would enrich trial lawyers and cause employers to drop medical
benefits for workers. It now goes to a conference committee, where it must be
reconciled with a Senate version that does not include expansive right-to-sue
provisions. Final passage is also threatened by a rider that gives tax-breaks
for certain health expenditures--which many Democrats, including President
Clinton, say help only the rich.

            The $3.75 billion fen-phen settlement includes $2.55 billion for users who
have developed heart-valve problems and $1.2 billion to monitor the healthy and
issue refunds. Benefits are not limited to those who sued: Any one of the six
million Americans who took the drug can submit claims, and there is no statute
of limitations. AHP will refund prescription fees for anyone who took the drug;
payments for those with heart problems range from $6,000 to $1.4 million. The
settlement does not cover 100 outstanding lawsuits, which could cost another $1
billion to settle. Oddly, the LAT puts the nominal, rather than the
inflation-adjusted, payout in both its headline and its lede. The LAT
is confusing money with wealth; it should do as the Post does, and not mention the nominal figure at all. All the
papers report that AHP will take a $3.29 billion after-tax charge against
third-quarter earnings to pay for the entire settlement. Only the
Journal explains why this amount is sufficient: Insurance pays the
rest. Although this charge works out to $2.51 per share, AHP's stock price rose
7.8% yesterday. (Investors, apparently, prefer certain losses to the
uncertainty of outstanding claims.)

            The NYT and Post front the overwhelming victory of India's Hindu-nationalist Bharatiya Janata
Party. The party formed a centrist coalition government which is expected to be
the most stable Indian government in years. Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee
pledged to devote himself to economic reform and steer away from the
anti-Muslim policies that have sometimes characterized his party. Sonia
Gandhi's Congress Party was dealt the worst defeat in its history.

            A NYT investigation of Colin Powell's charity, America's Promise,
alleges that it has undefined goals, does not meet its own deadlines, takes
credit for corporate contributions and community projects with which it is only
peripherally involved, and does not reveal how or how much it pays its top
officers, as charities traditionally do. The Times notes that a
columnist in the current Chronicle of Philanthropy argues that Powell should disband
the organization.

            The NYT reefers Donald Trump's formation of an exploratory committee for a
presidential campaign. "Unless I thought I could win the whole thing, I would
have no interest," he tells the Times , which notes that The Donald has
name recognition and an estimated worth of $1.5 billion. (To learn more about
exploratory committees, click 
here.)

            On the NYT op-ed page, British Prime Minister Tony Blair, French
President Jacques Chirac, and German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder implore
the U.S. Senate to ratify the Comprehensive [Nuclear] Test Ban Treaty, which
the GOP has been threatening to put off until next year. "We will not be
relying on the good will of a rogue state to allow inspectors onto its
territory," the three leaders write. "Under the treaty, a global network of
[verification] stations is being set up. ... Rejection would give great
encouragement to proliferators. Rejection would also expose a fundamental
divergence within NATO."

            
               USAT highlights another boon of the Internet: cheap caskets. "When
all is said and done, a casket is just a box with a door on it," says a former
truck-parts manufacturer who now sells caskets. Buying caskets on the Web--at
sites like directcasket.com, casketgallery.com, and downtoearthcoffin.com--creates "emotional detachment" about
the purchase, says USAT , which helps grieving relatives avoid the
exorbitant casket fees of funeral homes. "You don't feel that pressure to be
done with it and be out of there," says one happy customer. "It's more like
buying a suit."


         
      
   
