
   
   
      
         
            Life's Randomly Proportioned Cocktail
            

            Dear Mim:

            Back in the '80s--that eruption of a decade when we
first met, and I almost drank myself to death--friends would repeat the story
of how Ronald Reagan would watch the 7 o'clock network news, but then happily
go on and take in Wheel of Fortune , even though the
problems of the presidency continued to loom. They were seeking early
confirmation that Ron was as dumb as a dinner plate, but I found it one of the
befuddled old huckster's more endearing qualities. You are absolutely right
when you say Buffy the Vampire Slayer and your
opposition to the death penalty must exist "cheek by jowl." The modern world
comes at us as a randomly proportioned cocktail of the portentous, the
terrifying, and the trivial. Although it may seem to some like ersatz
sophistication, the only way I can find to process the torrent of information
to which I find myself constantly exposed is with a trash aesthetic. While all
around grows unmanageably grave, The Simpsons , Eddie
Izzard, a James Elroy novel, or the fact that Taco Bell is giving away free
alien eyeballs, and I simply have to have one, all prevent my perspectives from
succumbing to the kind of cultural isolation and spiteful tunnel vision that
has become the hallmark of modern political discussion.

            One e-mail complainant castigates 
                  Slate
                for allowing someone "who wrote a
book about Jim Morrison" loose to practice news commentary at "The Breakfast
Table." (In fact, it's a novel that Publishers
Weekly just describes as "jagged and flashy," but that's beside the point.)
So what does this guy want? Another pigeonhole graduate of the Robert
Novak/Arianna Huffington Pundit School, where absolute and entrenched "my side
right, your side wrong" makes a marketable media commodity? Unfortunately homie
can't play that, and I don't think, dear, Mim, you can either. We both still
think too much, and are even willing to lower our sophistication, no matter how
ersatz, to the childlike simplicity of asking what's wrong with this picture
when needed.

            The reason I have spent so much space and energy
sticking needles in the voodoo dummy of George W. is not because I'm a
committed Democrat, Republican, liberal, compassionate conservative, or
whatever. My politics are, in fact, much more murky. (In the privacy of night,
I still weep for Che Guevara and the IWW.) I simply don't want the American
people--and the world--to enter a new millennium ruled by a man who was elected
to the most powerful post on the planet simply because he had the most
money.

            Promoting my book, Conspiracies,
Lies and Hidden Agendas , I encountered large numbers of very frightened
people. These are the ones who believe that FEMA and the Fed are merely fronts
for the New World Order or the infiltrating aliens. Oh yes, easy to dismiss
them as crazy, but they are also some of the 40 million with no health care,
and the downsized castoffs whose manufacturing jobs have been sold south to
Third World cheap labor. Refuge in paranoid fantasy because reality is devoid
of hope creates that highly fertile soil where seeds of the most dangerous kind
can germinate. The next administration is going the need all the brilliance,
flexibility, and cultural insight it can muster, and I'll welcome these
attributes, if genuine, from any quarter and attached to just about any track
record.

            Love, l-u-v
Mick

         
      
   
