
   
   
      
         
            Nixon: I Am Not an Anti-Semite

            The National Archives' latest release of Nixon White House tapes is, as
usual, a bracing antidote to historical revisionism. Whenever the academic
world is tempted to adopt a more favorable view of Nixon's character, new Nixon
tapes always seem to appear that squelch the impulse. (To read

                  Slate
               's David Greenberg on Nixon revisionists, click here.) The theme of the
latest release, according to articles in yesterday's Washington Post and today's New York Times , is Nixon's anti-Semitism. We already
knew, of course, that Nixon had a pathological hatred of Jews. (Scroll down to
the bottom of "
Deep Throat: The Game Is Afoot" to see Nixon's outrage on discovering that
Mark Felt, a high-ranking FBI official believed by both Nixon and Chatterbox to
have been Deep Throat, is Jewish.) But even Chatterbox was taken aback at the
virulence of some of Nixon's comments on the new tapes--which, sadly, are not
available either in audio or in transcript form on the Web. (The best
Chatterbox can do is refer you to the quotations in the Post and Times stories, which were based on the reporters'
own transcriptions.)

            Here's a fairly stunning snippet from George Lardner's Post
piece:

            

               
                  Washington "is full of Jews," the president asserted. "Most Jews are
disloyal." He made exceptions for some of his top aides, such as national
security adviser Henry Kissinger, his White House counsel, Leonard Garment, and
one of his speechwriters, William Safire, and then added:
               

               "But, Bob, generally speaking, you can't trust the bastards. They turn on
you. Am I wrong or right?"

               Haldeman agreed wholeheartedly. "Their whole orientation is against you. In
this administration, anyway. And they are smart. They have the ability to do
what they want to do--which is to hurt us."

            

            And here's a similarly outrageous example from Irvin Molotsky's story in the
Times :

            

               
                  "The only two non-Jews in the communist conspiracy," [Nixon] said,
"were [Whittaker] Chambers and [Alger] Hiss. Many felt that Hiss
was. He could have been a half, but he was not by religion. The only two
non-Jews. Every other one was a Jew. And it raised hell with us."
               

            

            Most stunning of all, however, was the Times' assertion that the
Richard Nixon Library
and Birthplace in Yorba Linda, which purports to be a serious research
institution, "issued a statement saying the President was not
anti-Semitic " [italics Chatterbox's]. Chatterbox, always wary of
paraphrase, decided to take a closer look at the Nixon Library's statement,
which you can read by going to the Library Web site and clicking on "The White House Tape
Recordings, February to July 1971: A Guide to the Major Themes and
Personalities."

            Actually, the Nixon Library document nowhere says that Nixon was not
anti-Semitic. The phrases "anti-Semite" and "anti-Semitic" don't appear in the
Nixon Library document at all , aside from this passage:

            

               
                  President Nixon, after expressing the view that most Jewish Americans are
insisting that the Administration go along with what he regards as Israeli
intransigence on the Suez Canal and other Mideast peace issues while refusing
to give him support on his Vietnam policy, remarks: "If anybody who's been in
this chair ever had reason to be anti-Semitic
                   [italics
Chatterbox's] , I did." H.R. Haldeman replies: "That's for damn sure." The
President continues: "And I'm not, you know what I mean? Accepted, I'm not
pro-Israel; I'm not going to let Israel's tail wag the dog."
               

            

            
               However , the overall thrust of the portion of the Nixon Library
document that interprets Nixon's remarks on "Jewish Americans" is indeed to
downplay Nixon's comic-book anti-Semitism:

            

               
                  As with his attitudes toward African Americans, the President's words
about the Jewish community on these tapes show that his basic sense of
compassion and support for these communities tends to co-exist with terminology
from an earlier time.
               

            

            An earlier time? This was 1971, not 1917! Attitudes toward African Americans
were appalling (many would say they still are), but attitudes toward
Jews --particularly in Washington--were fairly benign. The Nixon Library
seems eager to blame Haldeman for egging Nixon on:

            

               
                  It should be noted that the President's comments regarding lack of
political support for the Administration among many Jewish Americans frequently
occur when Haldeman is present, and that Haldeman is generally quick to note
when some person who is the subject of adverse comment happens to be Jewish
...
               

            

            It should further be noted that Haldeman's eagerness to enable Nixon's
Jew-hating, which may have stemmed from his tendency to pander to all of
Nixon's worst instincts, or may have reflected sincere anti-Semitism of his
own--Chatterbox has no idea--does nothing to mitigate the appalling bigotry of
Nixon's comments. The Nixon Library's gloss on Nixon's remarks about Jews ends
by pointing out that despite Nixon's initial misgivings about appointing
Herbert Stein to chair the Council on Economic Advisors (Stein, who prior to
his recent death was
a 
                  Slate
                contributor, was also Jewish),

            

               
                  the President, within months, would make Stein his Chairman of the
CEA--just as he would give the Jewish state unequivocal, life-saving support in
the 1973 Arab-Israeli War. * The actions of the President, as well as the
substantial documentary record of the Nixon Administration, should always be
kept in mind when evaluating his words on the White House tapes.
               

            

            Chatterbox won't dispute that this century has seen bigger anti-Semites than
Richard Nixon. On the other hand, Nixon's comments about Jews make, say, Pat
Buchanan's seem comparatively benign. (This is not to excuse Buchanan, who in
the latest issue of George --OK, in a profile written by
Chatterbox--implores, preposterously, that if he were an anti-Semite, "Would I
have a Jewish doctor who deals with my heart? Would I have a Jewish broker?")
Chatterbox would think that part of the burden of working at the Nixon Library
is conceding that Richard Nixon, while no doubt misunderstood in many ways, was
one wicked anti-Semite. But a glance back at the Nixon Library's Web site
reminds Chatterbox that for the Nixon Library, the fundraising (hence the need
to downplay controversy) never stops. "FOR YOUR NEXT SPECIAL EVENT, CHOOSE THE
NIXON LIBRARY!" reads the lettering on a faux campaign button. Click it
and you receive an energetic pitch to hold your next corporate dinner, or even
your next wedding, on these hallowed grounds:

            

               
                  BEFORE YOU SIT DOWN TO DINNER in our terrazo tiled, birdseye maple lined
foyer, join your guests for a sunset reception in our spectacular gardens.
Promenade down the colonnade walkways, tour the original birthplace home of the
President, and muse on the tranquility or our handsome reflecting pool.
               

            

            Which raises the question: Where to put the chuppah ?

            
               *For Stein's own view of Nixon and Jews, click 
               here .

         
      
   
