
   
   
      
         
            Pachydermatitis
            

            Dear Steve:

             Hope all's well. I myself have
been keeping busy maintaining the aftermath of my Village Voice piece on Art Spiegelman--just got the new issue of
the Comics Journal with your quotes in it, by the
way--but I honestly wish this whole thing would go away. But as an editorial
cartoonist, nothing depresses me more than the overnight disintegration of the
once-interesting "Week in Review" section--where the New York Times runs three or four cartoons each Sunday--into the
same mainstream tripe that Newsweek 's
"Perspectives" section and USA Today 's Friday
editorial page offer. It was never perfect, but the "Week in Review" used to
run the more daring and adventurous editorial cartoons around (stuff that
actually editorialized!) by Tom Tomorrow, Ruben "Tom the Dancing Bug" Bolling,
and yours truly; now it's back to cross-hatching, elephants and donkeys, and
dumb gags about the news. Can you and I agree that any cartoonist who uses
pachyderms to denote the GOP should be dispatched to Afghanistan for ritual
stoning at the Talidrome?

            I know few of my leftie pals will be sad for the Colt
gun company, which is laying off hundreds of its West Hartford, Conn., workers
and trashing its consumer business because it's been savaged by lawsuits. But
guns are a legal product, and I find it yet another statement about the
post-Clintonian world we live in that we don't have the balls to simply make a
product illegal but see nothing wrong with using the courts to harrass its
manufacturers out of business. For instance, smoking should obviously be banned
as the No. 1 cause of premature death in this country, not to mention of
countless house and forest fires. But since no politician has the guts to
advocate such a drastic (in my view, rational) measure, we end up with zillions
of lawsuits by people who've always known that smoking was dangerous against
tobacco companies. It's the same with guns; if we as a society decide that we
want to get rid of the Second Amendment, then let's do that instead of abusing
the court system and driving perfectly law-abiding businesses into
bankruptcy.

            Stephen Kinzer continues his dispatches from the former
Soviet republic of Kyrgyzstan in today's New York
Times . Last week, it was a missive from a yak farm about that country's
ancient tradition of nomadism; this week he's covering an enclave of ethnic
Germans who live near the capital of Bishkek. I just got back from Central Asia
a week ago--I passed through Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, western China,
Kashmir Province (from where, incidentally, I can report that the Taliban now
occupy a large part of what used to be Pakistani-held Kashmir in a bid to bring
Pakistan over to Islamic fundamentalist rule), and Pakistan proper. Kyrgyzstan
is a stunning place of amazing mountains and lakes, grinding poverty and lost
ideology, and of course oodles of history. There's a chance Americans will be
sending troops out to Central Asia in coming years to defend American oil
interests, so we should all be reading up on this stuff. And Kinzer is an
awesome writer.

            I was leaning toward supporting a mainstream
presidential candidate--Al Gore, because he's the only guy who understands that
the budget doesn't much matter if global warming puts the entire planet under
water--until I read this morning's Times interview
with campaign manager Donna Brazile. She refers to herself as a "diva." Um,
Donna, divas sing. They sing well. Really well. I checked cdnow.com just now,
and couldn't find any Donna Brazile CDs. This trend of people confusing divas
with anyone arrogant and annoying is itself seriously annoying.

            The beginning of the trial of Russell Henderson, who's
accused of beating Matthew Shepard to death in Laramie, Wyo., last year,
coincides with more calls for hate-crime bills as well as for the death penalty
among liberals who ought to know better. All lives ought to be considered equal
under the law; if you kill someone because they're gay, it shouldn't be worse
than killing someone because they like the Mets. It's still damned awful, and
you shouldn't see much sunlight for the rest of your life either way. As for
the death penalty, it's not like murderers don't deserve to die; of course they
do. It's just that the state shouldn't be in the business of killing them--it
turns every single taxpayer into a killer.

            Bill Bradley voted for the 1981 Reagan budget, which
pushed Generation X into underemployment and student-loan hell for more than a
decade, destroyed the welfare state, and symbolized the new American view that
no one should give a damn about anyone else. For this reason alone, he deserves
to never hold any kind of public office.

            Wow--am I ever cranky this morning! I'd better go get
some coffee.

            Your turn.

            Very truly yours,
Ted

         
      
   
