
   
   
      
         
            L.A.: Too Much for the Man
            

            Hello, Richard,

            As always, it is a treat to read your cogent insights. I agree with you that
the big story here involves the changes in capitalism and especially in the
nature of work. Unfortunately, I think it would have been a much stronger book
if the author saw it that way. ...

            First, I have an urgent message for Susan Faludi: Get out of Los Angeles as
soon as possible! There is a real world out here with real people in it. If
possible, bring Sylvester before his spirit is crushed forever beneath the
weight of all those muscles. We're waiting for you!

            Susan Faludi's book has two great strengths. First, she engages with a big
and profound set of questions that affect all of our lives. She does this with
great earnestness and deep commitment. She devoted years of her life to the
undertaking. How many authors will do that? Too few, I think. Second, Faludi's
interviews with an unusual selection of men are masterful gems, each one cut
and shaped by profound empathy, vivid observation, and keen listening. They are
rendered in rich romantic prose that pungently conveys the disparate worlds of
her interlocutors. I love the way she lets us in on the action through her own
responses of compassion and bewilderment. She is always there, never silent, as
we feel men and women opening up to her, trusting her, bonding with her, so
much so that months and years later, they continue to call and bring her up to
date on their lives and their troubles. What I cherish about this book, and
about Faludi herself, is the way she surrendered to the mystery and adventure
of this intellectual journey. She began with one set of assumptions and allowed
them to transform, as she herself was transformed by the men she came to know.
Her personal authenticity was the backdrop against which these men were able to
turn their experiences into words with an anguished and heartbreaking
transparency. Without being mawkish, I think one can say that Susan Faludi
reached beyond her role as a feminist, or even as a writer. She reached toward
her own individual humanity and through that medium reached a deeper truth with
those men she sought to understand. Between her introduction and her
conclusion, each of the "empirical" chapters--on the shipbuilders, the Citadel
cadets, the "gangstas," the Spur Posse, the Vietnam vets, the Promise Keepers,
the football fans, the militiamen, the porno film stars, the fashion tyrants
and their slaves, and Sylvester Stallone--can stand alone as testimony to a
rich and unique life-world.

            The question inevitably arises, though: What does it all mean? Here I
believe Susan Faludi gets it mostly wrong. There are two critical intellectual
errors that form the very foundation of her undertaking: one substantive, the
other methodological. I was hopeful when I read on Page 15 her complaint that
"popular accounts of the male crisis and male confusions are almost
unrelievedly ahistorical," but I was crestfallen some pages later, when she
identifies some of the deep historical structures that might have allowed her
to unravel her data, and then dismisses them as irrelevant:

            

               I'm not speaking simply of the economic shift from industry to service ...
nor about a shift from a society organized around industry to one set up around
electronic technology. And I'm not speaking simply about the irony of men
supporting a massive military-industrial effort to produce machines ... that
ultimately would replace them ... Those changes were only surface symptoms
...

            

             There is no way to talk about these historic shifts "simply." And this is
the first time I have heard these monumental issues in the evolution of
material life referred to as "surface symptoms"! Whoa! If that's the surface,
then we must be talking about something very deep indeed that is the cause of
all this angst. But what is it? Well, by Page 596 we arrive at Faludi's
definition of the heart of this particular darkness: The deep pain experienced
by the men she meets is explained by this confession and complaint: "My father
never taught me how to be a man." So, here we are once again on a canvas of
ahistorical pop psychology, where the silence of the fathers and their devotion
to commercial culture has crippled the sons, leaving them no source of meaning
other than "Were they 'sexy'? Were they 'known'? Had they 'won'?"

            If there is a crisis of masculinity, then it truly can only be understood
through history. We are now completing, at least in the West, the last feudal
century. For the first time in any society, a majority of its people are
educated and informed. For the first time in any society, a majority of its
people use their brains and not their backs to accomplish its work. The bonds
of hierarchy and patriarchy are not dissolved, but faded and weakened as never
before. The fixed productive and reproductive roles of men and women, once
determined by anatomy, are now giving way to an exhilarating and terrifying
plethora of choices. The concept of work has been forever transformed and the
boundaries of class have followed suit. These are the deep structures that are
in motion. These are the sources of the ruptures with the past we all face.

            If there is a crisis, then rejoice! The old sources of meaning that kept us
each in our place are dead or dying. Susan Faludi's men are being crushed as
the tectonic plates of history roil and split and mow them down. They complain
and whine and wail for a world that is vanishing. OK. It hurts. But this is
their opportunity to not just be he-men but human beings. If they can't be
useful by protecting their women and "making" things--then it's time to embrace
the usefulness of supporting their women, learning new skills, committing to
their families, and finding new ways to teach their children and contribute to
their communities. The old world had women in a box and men in a harness. No
one was allowed to venture outside their roles. If the fathers were silent, its
because that's how they thought the script was written. Don't pine for that!
Get on with the challenge of forging a new life and writing your own, better,
script.

            Finally, the methodological fallacy at the heart of this book: "If you want
to see what's happening in the stream called our society," says one of Faludi's
"patriots," "go to the edges and look at what's happening there ..." This
alleged "societal dynamic" becomes her methodological justification for using
the stories of the "underemployed, contracted-out, and laid-off men of Southern
California to illuminate more general male losses... " It must be said that
this kind of approach is very tricky. If you are going to pick a few cases to
illustrate the larger whole, then you have to have some pretty compelling and
well-articulated reasoning for their selection. I am surprised, Richard, that
you find Faludi's characterizations of the male crisis to fit the British
profile. I think that what she has unearthed in grisly detail is the uniquely
shallow, instrumental, and crass culture of Los Angeles (which I once heard
described as "high school with money"), where looks, fame, and income compose
the ranking rules for a truly wacky hierarchy. Lamentably, she has lost sight
of just how weird and out of the mainstream that culture is. It is not our
culture. It is not our society. It is not the grain of sand in which the real
world that most of us live in is etched. The gangsters, the militiamen, the
porn actors, the over-the-top football fans--they're all fascinating, but I
don't think that any of them says very much about most of us. But then, I live
in Maine, where ornamental culture has made little impression, except possibly
through a widespread interest in the L.L. Bean catalogue.

            Once again, a plea to Susan and Sylvester. Move to Maine. It's not too late.
We'll love you here even if you have a paunch or imperfect thighs!

            More later,
Shoshana Zuboff

         
      
   
