
   
   
      
         
            George W., Winking Frat-Boy
            

            Dear Ted,

            
Don't drink that coffee, man, you just got us off to a good start. Really
interesting about your trip to Central Asia. You're right, of course--Islam is
yet to be recognized by the West as a defining, driving political force in the
world. Look at Chechnya. It's possible there will be no way out for Russia
because of that strain of wild fundamentalism.

            Did you see the Page One piece in the New York Times yesterday by
Melinda Henneberger and Frank Bruni on Tom DeLay and George W. Bush? It shows
how these two are not as dissimilar as Bush wants us to think they are. God,
his campaign is smart. I did a profile of him for Esquire last year and
interviewed Karl Rove, his chief strategist. Rove is brilliant. He talked about
Irishmen, the difference between the dark, tormented Irish and the sunny Irish.
His plan saw Bush as a sunny conservative, someone who could wink and reassure
his extremely conservative base while using his jocular, frat-boy personality
to beguile and soothe the rest of us. Rove understands, as few Republicans do,
what a dark side the GOP represents to voters. Bush's campaign is especially
strong because it is very aware of how out of touch social conservatism is in
the 1990's. So rather than wait for some Democrat to say that, they'll put Tom
DeLay to some good use and whip him . DeLay doesn't seem to mind. He's a
professional S.O.B. He knows that if all this helps get Bush elected, he'll
save congressional seats as well. So what's the problem? It's we in the media
who are flummoxed by the seeming "conflict." But really they are two sides of
the same head!

             How about Maureen Dowd's Op-Ed
yesterday about your diva Donna Brazile. According to Dowd, Brazile was deputy
field director for Dukakis (Dukakis!!!) and was responsible for floating rumors
about George Bush Sr.'s extramarital affairs. First we have Tony Coelho, then
warring advisers, Carter Eskew, Gore sleepwalking through a clumsy spendthrift
campaign operation, and now ... Donna Brazile. How can Gore expect people to
vote for him when he can't even dress himself?

            Cheers,
Steve

         
      
   
