
   
   
      
         
            All in the Same Boat
            

            Susan Faludi's Stiffed
argues American men are suffering from a masculinity crisis, but it isn't
women's fault. She conducted a wide range of interviews over the last few years
across the grain of American society--shipbuilders, magazine editors, Promise
Keepers, aging Vietnam veterans. The crisis of masculinity she describes
appears on two fronts. One involves "utilitarian masculinity," which is the
pride of self men feel thanks to their skills, their commitments to their work,
and to other men in the course of accomplishing a task. The other sort of
masculinity she calls "ornamental," and it is just that, the ornaments of
cigars/leather chairs/Porsches/babes that festoon the pages of Details , Esquire , and the
New York Times "Men's Fashions" supplement. The
utilitarian male is a producer, the ornamental male is a consumer.

            In Faludi's view, men as producers suffer from the
changes in work that more largely frame today's capitalism. This is a
short-term world in which people are constantly changing jobs, dealing in
intangibles of information and connections rather than making solid things, a
world in which the craftsman who nurtures a skill over his lifetime is out of
place. Correspondingly, male consumers are being sold fickle and impossible
images of their sexuality and their social honour: fickle because the clothes,
face creams, and similar goods now change like women's hemlines, offering no
stable sense of self, impossible ornaments because the Porsche and the $10
cigar lie in the realm of fantasy for most men struggling to make ends
meet.

            Put so baldly, Faludi's argument may seem just another
version of Demon Capitalism. But she is too good an interviewer to be trapped
in that cliché. When she interviews shipbuilders losing their jobs, for
instance, she shows how the old-fashioned pride in doing a good job remains
even when the shipbuilders have come to the very end of their employment; their
craft pride transcends any whining about being capitalism's victims. No more
does the ornamental male wear his jewelry of self comfortably; the buffed pecs
and washboard stomachs portrayed in the Times '
men's section are sources of anxiety rather than pleasure.

            Perhaps the most spacious dimension of Faludi's
argument is that she, unlike many feminist writers, has a real feel for male
bonding, and for the need of men to feel they can hold their heads up with
honor. She doesn't succumb to the simple-minded idea that male honor inevitably
requires female oppression. Again, in her interviews with the post-Vietnam
generation, she reaches out to understand the bonds forged by the violence of
men at war. Above all, while she rejects the notion that the crisis of
utilitarian masculinity in the workplace has resulted from the gains
middle-class women workers have made in the last generation, she also shows
that many women employees have been insensitive to the confusions of self that
the new economy has bred in men.

            The very openness and depth of her interviewing poses
the first question I have about Stiffed . Is this
really a book about maleness, or is it a reflection in the lives of men of
something more generally applicable to American society, female as well as
male? Isn't Faludi describing a society in which social honor and self-respect
are largely in short supply, or supplied in a fashion that can give no real
satisfaction? In interviews I've done with female nurses and mental-health
workers, for instance, I've found the same sense of craft, and the same feeling
that the short-term cost-cutting of the medical business leaves them no room to
realize their own inner potential.

            A second large question: "Ornamental culture," Faludi
tells us, is "at its core ... a virulent voyeurism" with sex being its "gold
standard" [p.505]. But the interviews she conducts, as with the Promise
Keepers, seem to me more about the ornaments of fatherhood and husband-hood, an
inability of American males to find on the tube or at the movies images of how
fathers and husbands ought to deal with the complexities of parenting and
long-term relationships. Either the domestic male is portrayed as a goody-goody
moral saint or as a guilt-ridden prisoner of the intimate realm. Sex isn't the
issue, I think; the consumer culture has trivialized adult experiences of
responsibility, flattened out intimacy so that it appears a zone in which
people, women as well as men, are pulled between self development and
obligation to others: Ozzie and Harriet vs.
Eyes Wide Shut (a film that for all its sex tries
to show sex is anything but the "gold standard" for a man; the inchoate but
strong impulse to break free is what really drives the male character).

            Finally, as an American living abroad, I was struck in
reading Faludi's interviews how resonant they are with issues of self-worth and
self-image among men here in Britain. It's easy for Americans to imagine that
our mobile, placeless society doesn't give people much outside themselves with
which to identify; indeed, in her interviews, Faludi finds many men longing for
a mythical time when they knew where they belonged. But that longing for a lost
home, a secure sense of self, appears equally in Britain--or in Germany. And
this brings us back to the issue of capitalism. The disturbances of work and
consumption that Faludi so brilliantly depicts are, I think, global in scope,
they cut across the boundaries of gender, and they transcend sexual vanity.

         
      
   
