
   
   
      
         
            Why Hasn't the U.S. Gone Metric?
            

            On Sept. 23, the $123 million Mars Climate Orbiter was lost when it veered
off course and burned up in the Martian atmosphere. Last week, NASA revealed
the cause: One part of the orbiter's navigation system was speaking in English
units and another in metric. Why hasn't the U.S. adopted the metric system?

            The metric system originated in France in the late 17 th century
to combat rampant commercial fraud by farmers and shopkeepers who used the
varied systems of weights and measures to their advantage. Scientists were also
demanding a standardized system to facilitate international cooperation on
research. While old systems seemed arbitrary, the new standardized system had
an apparent basis in nature: The meter was defined as 1/10,000,000 of the
distance between the equator and either pole (it has since been redefined in
terms of the speed of light). It was also easier to remember than other systems
because it was based on the decimal system.

            France officially adopted the metric system in the early 1800s, and the rest
of the continent quickly followed in hopes that a standardized measurement
system would spur international trade. Over the next hundred years, the metric
system spread globally. The British Commonwealth resisted abandoning their
traditional measures, but in the early 1970s--under the slogan "Metric: 10
times better"--they, too, metricated. (Some road signs and body weights,
however, remain "customary.") Today, the U.S. is one of only three
countries--along with Myanmar and Liberia--where the metric system is not
commonly used.

            Officially, at least, the U.S. has gone metric. The yard, the pound,
and the gallon--prototypes of which were once held in London--are now
officially defined by reference to metric units. In 1975, the federal
government adopted metric as the nation's "preferred measurement system" and
established the United States Metric Board to manage the transition. The
changeover was ineffective, however, and by the early 1980s, the only tangible
progress was that liquor and wine had to be labeled in liters. Metrication was
revived in 1988, when Congress required that all government agencies be metric
by 1992 to the extent "feasible." Today, agencies with large international or
scientific operations--like the Department of Defense and NASA--are almost
fully converted; others--like the Department of Education--have done little,
citing the rights of states to decide such matters. America's private sector is
similarly mixed: Large corporations with overseas exports are at least partly
converted, but most small businesses still use the English system.

            American metric advocates encountered stiff opposition in the '70s and '80s.
Labor unions worried that workers would be unable to learn a new system.
Businesses protested that redesigning machines and products to metric standards
would be costly. States objected to the expense of replacing road signs and
revising laws. And average citizens argued that change was unnecessary and said
the metric system--with its multiples of 10, instead of the more intuitive
halves and quarters of English measures--was not compatible with human
experience. In contrast, there was no natural constituency for the pro-metric
cause.

            But similar obstacles were encountered--and overcome--in other countries.
So, some metric advocates attribute America's non-conversion to national
character. American individualism, they say, makes us more resistant to
government-mandated change than other cultures. For example, Mother
Jones reported that the National Cowboy Hall of Fame sued to block
metrication, claiming "the West was won by the inch, foot, yard, and mile."
Metric supporters also see xenophobia in Americans' distaste for a foreign
system of measurement. In the 1970s, some opponents suggested that metric road
signs would facilitate a Russian invasion.

            Others ascribe American inaction to logistical obstacles. It is a classic
instance of path dependency: Once a course is chosen, it is difficult to induce
people to switch. And until the 1990s, the U.S. had little incentive to do so,
since the economy was sufficiently dominant in its trade relationships to
enforce English units on its partners. (This may soon change, as the European
Union plans to ban products labeled in English units at the end of the year.)
Also, unlike other nations, the United States' metrication legislation has been
entirely voluntary, so few organizations have transitioned. The Department of
Commerce's Metric Program--which took up the cause when the Metric Board was
abolished in 1982--now focuses on outreach to the business community, instead
of legislation. The year's marquee event, "Metric Week," begins this
Sunday--the 10th day of the 10th month.

            ( Mother Jones recounts the struggles of "the
least powerful men in Washington ," the staff of the Department of
Commerce's Metric Program. Also see the Web page of the U.S. Metric
Association for exhaustive information on metrication.)

            Next question?

         
      
   
