
   
   
      
         
            Policy Corner: Bush Ed II

            There are some decent things in Bush's second big
education proposal that got overshadowed by his implicit attack on conservative
Republicans. One is Bush's offer of $3 billion in loan guarantees to spur the
construction of 2,000 charter schools in two years. Consolidating some 60
federal education programs into five categories isn't a bad idea, either.

            But the central thrust of Bush's "Culture of
Achievement" plan, which relates to standards and testing, deploys just the
kind of unwieldy regulatory mechanism Bush is elsewhere trying to eliminate.
Indeed, even Bush's top education advisors don't think this aspect of the
proposal makes much sense--except in political terms.

            In the plan unveiled at his speech to the Manhattan
Institute on Tuesday, Bush proposed that states be rewarded or penalized with
federal dollars on the basis of whether student performance improves in the
future. This implies standards and testing: If you're going to have a system of
rewards and punishments, you have to have some way to judge who deserves which.
W.'s idea of merit pay for states points, in fact, toward something advocated
by his father, Bill Clinton, and countless other education reformers:
national standards and tests. National standards
would set a benchmark for what children of different ages should be expected to
know. National tests would allow for objective evaluation of how well various
states and schools were teaching them.

            But this runs smack into a big political problem.
Conservatives reject anything that smacks of federal control of education
policy, funding, or curriculum. In particular, the right is paranoid about
bureaucrats at the Department of Education setting curricular standards or
administering tests. They see national tests as a violation of local
prerogatives and a step toward a Washington takeover of education in
general.

            So Bush splits the difference, opting for what you might
call local-national standards. Here's how his Rube Goldberg system would work,
as far as I can understand it. In line with conservative dogma, states would be
free to set their own standards and select the tests that they would be
obligated to give to every child between grades three and eight, every year, as
a condition of receiving federal money. The federal government would pay half
the cost of these tests.

            The problem: As with the first part of the plan, which
deals with Title One funding (see "Policy Corner: Bush Ed"), the states themselves
determine whether they deserve more or less money from the feds. Bush is not
entirely unaware of this moral-hazard problem. To counter it, he adds another
"optional" test, this one federal. The federal government "asks" (in other
words, tells) states to participate in the annual National Assessment of
Education Progress (NAEP). The idea here is, as Ronald Reagan once said, "Trust
but verify." States don't have to participate in the NAEP, but if they don't,
they must pay for an alternative test themselves and prove that the results can
be "equated" with NAEP results. So what would happen if the state test and the
NAEP differed, as they inevitably would? This is left ambiguous, for obvious
reasons. If federal money is actually tied to performance on NAEP, then the
state tests are a meaningless sop to conservatives. And if the money is tied to
state tests, then the whole incentive structure--and the idea of making valid
comparisons among states--collapses.

            Bush's education "surrogates," Diane Ravitch and William
Bennett, spoke to reporters before his Tuesday speech to explain and defend his
proposal. Neither was able to do so very well for a simple reason: It
contradicts what they think. Both Ravitch and Bennett are long-standing
advocates of national standards and testing.

            Ravitch, who has written two books making the case for
national standards, says there is simply no alternative for Bush, because of
the opposition to the idea in both parties. "It's become obvious that at this
point Congress is not going to endorse a national test," she told me in a phone
interview. "So what would be the point of Bush supporting it?" Ravitch, who
says she considers herself a dissatisfied Democrat rather than a Republican,
adds this lukewarm endorsement, "I think that he is in some strange fashion
trying to do the right thing."

            Bennett is equally unenthusiastic. I asked him about the
standards issues after Bush's speech on Tuesday. "I told the governor that when
I had the job [secretary of Education], we evaluated the state evaluations,"
Bennett told me. "Ninety-two percent were scoring above average. You add up the
individual state assessments and you get a rosy picture." Bennett said that
while he thought Bush's plan might be workable, "I'm more of a
national-standards person."

            In other words, on a day when George Bush was supposedly
distancing himself from conservative Republicans, he was actually caving to
their foolish dogma on the issue at the center of campaign--over the objection
of his two top advisors on the subject.

         
      
   
