
   
   
      
         
            Don't Worry, Be Happy
            

            My dear, thank you.

            My primary news sources today have been the New York Times Op-Ed page
and MTV News, venues in which William Bennett and Whitney Houston addressed the
need for compassion and optimism in this old world of ours in ways that were
disturbingly similar. I leave you to guess which in which venue. Bennett also
happily commented on the decrease in noise, graffiti, and panhandling in New
York City under the Giuliani administration, as I would like to say only
someone who lives in D.C., as he does, could, except that many people who live
here do also, although it does to a large degree depend on where you live. The
tourists who come into my neighborhood make every bit as much, if not more,
noise than the homeless who have gone out. I used to have a number of friends
among the homeless crack-addicted mentally ill in my neighborhood eight or so
years ago, and although this friendship was not financially a totally equal
two-way street, I did borrow money from them on a few occasions when I was
running late and didn't want to stop at a cash machine. It's true that they
were smelly and that the sight of poverty and desperation are not pleasant, and
they all told the same self-serving lies for my benefit, and could never
remember no matter how many times they were told that white women don't think
it's a compliment to be told they have big legs, and they were noisy, although
they would pipe down if you cared to go out at three in the morning to ask,
which the tourists sure won't. I occasionally still see some of these
people--two have gotten clean, and two live on and deteriorate, but the other
half-dozen faded from view, three because they died, and two of those in
circumstances directly related to the more dangerous, harder-assed
neighborhoods into which they were swept by Giuliani's quality-of-life
campaign, one because he was set on fire. In other words, I find it hard to
rejoice about the improvement in my quality of life brought about by no longer
having people urinating in public up and down the block, because it wasn't
really my quality of life that was at issue, and anyway, overall as far as I
can tell, quality of life did not so much improve overall but redistribute
itself.

            I'm sorry you didn't get to Kathie Lee and the death squads. I also fear
that every attempt at universal health care will be sandbagged by the health
companies, not to mention that now that I have been so very critical of
Giuliani, it's only a matter of time before the police kick in my door and hall
me off to jail, as if I were a dangerous criminal, like Mary Boone. In the
meantime, I'm happy to have lived long enough to think I recognize a sample
from the Andrea True Connection's "More, More, More" in LEN's "If You Steal My
Sunshine."

            Big love to you,
Mim

         
      
   
