
   
   
      
         
            Reagan's Mixed Legacy
            

            Dear Dinesh,

            What a relief. Something would be very wrong if we found nothing to argue
about. It's also a relief to be able to put aside Morris' book, which we both
agree is a strange and wrongheaded failure, and talk about Reagan directly.

            And what about Reagan? Like most liberals, I was horrified by almost
everything Reagan did as president. Today, I consider him a much more
impressive figure than I once did and can even admire some of what he achieved.
But Morris, in his simplistic way, and you, in your much more knowledgeable
way, go much too far, I think, in your claims about Reagan's importance to
history.

            Several years ago, I wrote a long essay of my own about Reagan, the only
time I've tried to write anything serious about him, for a presidential
reference book; and I was surprised by how much more sympathetic I was to him
than I had once been. He deserves considerable credit, I think, for restoring a
sense of possibility and optimism to American popular culture. There is, of
course, an easily crossed line between confident optimism and arrogant
jingoism, and that line was sometimes crossed--by Reagan himself and by many
others--in the '80s (just as it was, much more disastrously, by many Democrats
in the '60s). But on the whole, I think he was a positive force in the way he
reduced the rancor and disillusionment that had grown so corrosive in the late
'60s and '70s.

            I also think that Reagan made some (I emphasize "some") important
contributions to American social policy. He continued and accelerated a
movement in both elite and popular thinking about welfare policy that had
largely begun in the Nixon years: that welfare should be much more closely tied
to work, that it should be (to use a phrase created, but never really acted
upon, by Lyndon Johnson) a "hand up not a handout." That movement has
culminated, at least so far, in the welfare reforms of the Clinton years, for
which both the president and the Congress are responsible. Reagan's own
understanding of the nature of the welfare system and its effects was, like
Morris', largely simplistic and uninformed. But his instincts were at least
partially right, and like many liberals, I was slow to recognize that. I now do
believe, as I think most Americans do, that getting people to work is the best
thing a public policy can do to lift people out of poverty and redeem their
lives. I note that William Julius Wilson, certainly no conservative, has argued
this quite eloquently in his recent book When Work Disappears . And I
think Reagan deserves some credit in legitimizing that notion, even if his
reasons for doing so are not necessarily ones I would support. The Reagan
administration was, I think, gratuitously punitive toward some of the poorest
and most desperate welfare recipients and put much too much of the burden of
its supposed deficit reduction on the backs of those least able to afford it
(and on programs so meagerly funded that their contribution to deficit
reduction was meaningless in any case). The same could be said for the
unattractively punitive features of the 1996 welfare reform. But it has also
gone largely unnoticed that the Reagan administration supported some of the
early state back-to-work experiments that eventually showed impressive results,
and that it expanded the EITC, which has now (after its much greater expansion
under Clinton) become one of the great success stories of contemporary social
policy.

            On the larger question of Reagan's economic policy, however, I am less in
agreement with you. No one can deny that the American economy grew impressively
after 1983, that the stock market rose astronomically, that there was much new
investment, and that many important new economic sectors flourished. Credit for
that must be distributed widely, but the economic policies of the Reagan
administration undoubtedly contributed. On the other hand, the economic boom of
the '80s and the '90s is unlike any previous economic boom in American history
in creating a very substantial upward distribution of wealth and in benefiting
those on the bottom 50 to 60 percent of the economic ladder very little, if at
all. Blame for that must also be distributed widely, but I have no doubt that
the Reagan administration's economic policies--cutting taxes mostly for the
upper brackets while watching higher social security taxes eat away at lower-
and middle-class family incomes, as just one example--contributed to this large
social failure.

            Finally, the Cold War. Of course Reagan and Bush and Thatcher and the Pope
and many others made contributions to the denouement of the Soviet Union, and
all deserve credit for that. But to say that Reagan was more responsible for
the collapse of the U.S.S.R. and the end of the Cold War than Gorbachev--or
that either of them was more responsible for it than the cascading economic
crises in the U.S.S.R. itself--just doesn't make sense. Yes, the Soviet economy
had never done as well as Western economies and had often experienced crises.
But the erosion of Soviet economic life in the last 10 years of its existence
as a nation was much more serious, rapid, and destructive than anything that
had come before. Certainly part of the reason for that was the very high levels
of unproductive military spending. But those high levels had been eroding the
economy since well before Reagan ratcheted up the arms race. (That was, after
all, one of his rationales for doing so.) There were many other grave problems
as well, not least--as I mentioned the other day--the Afghan War, none of which
were a result of Western policy.

            Morris' argument that Reagan's statements had a tremendous ideological
effect on the Soviet people is the weakest way to support the case for Reagan's
importance. The Russian people, whatever their views of their own regime, are
much too proud and nationalistic to take to heart Reagan's or any American's
denunciations of them. But while I give Reagan credit for recognizing the value
of working with Gorbachev and doing nothing to obstruct the changes that were
occurring and that were quickly moving well beyond what Gorbachev himself
wanted, I can see no basis on which to attribute the central role in this great
historical event to him. George Washington was president during the French
Revolution; we do not credit that event to him. Reagan was rather more
complicit in the end of the Soviet Union than Washington was in the end of the
French monarchy, but it was not ultimately his doing.

            You make a much better case for Reagan than Morris does, and historians will
certainly be debating these questions for generations. But I suspect that in
the end, the judgment of Reagan will be considerably more mixed than yours (and
perhaps more mixed than mine as well).

            It's been a pleasure discussing these issues with you. I wish I could say
the same about reading the book.

            Alan

         
      
   
