
   
   
      
         
            Zombie-Teen Ninjas and Other Neglected Topics
            

            And so, dear Mim,

            Just one more cup of coffee for the road, regrettably
leaving so much I haven't mentioned.

            Like how I fear every attempt at universal health care
will be sandbagged by the insurance companies. Like how an English doctor
demonstrated that the pharmaceutical industry charges us up to 1,000 percent
more than they do for the same medication in Europe. Like how Kathie Lee and
other sweatshop profiteers should thank those CIA-sponsored death squads of the
'80s, and the taxpayers who footed the bill. Like how pleased I was with the
e-mail on drug legalization. Like campaign funding reform and the TV industry.
Like Dan Quayle on Letterman . Like how come
capitalism forgot the need for the worker-consumer? Like how the religious
right is now gunning for American Airlines' gay-rights policy. Like will Joey
survive the second series of The Sopranos ?

            But I agree that k.j., who called us "overpaid," needs
to be set straight. This is the creative poor, friends and neighbors, just ask
my landlord. If it's any consolation, a "dissembling, conflicted blowhard" is
also known as an "artist" where I come from. I'm also starting to suspect that
pound-the-pundit is the other half of the collective game, and goes with the
territory. It's like the sideshow bozo above the tank of water; if they don't
hurl the balls, we don't have a show. (We'll see if they ask me back.)

            On the matter of armed overthrow of the government, I
don't think I can help you. I believe I gave my word to the INS that I wouldn't
do that kind of thing when I applied for my green card. Since a gentleman's
word must still be his bond, the best I can offer is to stand romantically on a
hill, the breeze flapping my duster coat around my legs, rolling a quarter
across my knuckles, and watching as crack assault units of Hello Kitty, the
Trenchcoat Mafia, and zombie-teen ninjas penetrate the Beltway.

            That's only leaves me to thank you for making the
suggestion, Susan for spotting some useful news items, and 
                  Slate
                for having me in for the
ride.

            Thank you. Thank you very much.

            Mick has left the table.

         
      
   
