
   
   
      
         
            Reagan's Triumph Over Collectivism
            

            Dear Alan:

            Now you've done it. You have ruined our chance to make
history by achieving almost complete unanimity. I knew this bipartisanship was
too good to last. Oh well, back to the battlefront.

            I don't want to fall into the trap of disagreeing with
you by defending Edmund Morris. I'll concede that in the areas where Morris
embraces Reaganism, it's generally for wrong and simple-minded reasons. The
amazing truth, which I take it you accept, is that it is Morris and not Reagan
who is the political simpleton.

            So why don't we leave poor Morris behind to enjoy his
Robert Frost and Edna Millay? And let's examine the two main elements of
Reaganism: his attack on the welfare state and his role in the collapse of the
Soviet Union. Actually, Reagan saw these as a single crusade. His life was
devoted to challenging and discrediting collectivism. For Reagan, Soviet
communism was only the most grotesque version of the collectivist impulse.
Reagan devoted his career to bringing down the "evil empire." But Reagan was
equally determined to discredit the Great Society because he didn't trust
intellectuals to plan the economy, and he (correctly) worried that high taxes
and government programs like welfare would diminish individual freedom and
responsibility.

            In practice, Reagan didn't cut domestic spending very
much. Actually, government spending on domestic programs grew under Reagan. I
think this is the price that Reagan consciously paid for fighting the Cold War.
He knew that the Democratic House, led by Tip O'Neill, would never agree to cut
domestic programs and put the money into B-1 bombers. So Reagan settled for
keeping government domestic spending roughly constant, while he focused his
energy on defense hikes aimed, as he put it, at inviting the Soviets into an
arms race that they couldn't win.

            But if Reagan lost the battle to control domestic
spending, he won the war over the larger question of the growth of the welfare
state. Reagan launched a powerful moral attack on the idea of Big Government.
He challenged the idea, popularized by JFK, that if you were an idealistic
American, you should join the Peace Corps or do "public service," in other
words, become a bureaucrat. Reagan denounced the bureaucrat as a do-nothing and
a loser, and celebrated the entrepreneur as one of the highest embodiments of
American creativity and possibility. And I think that Reagan prevailed. The era
of the welfare state that began with FDR effectively ended with RR. Bill
Clinton admitted as much when he said "the era of big government is over."
Today it's a settled question that markets, not intellectuals and bureaucrats,
run the economy.

            Alan, I expect that you think this is a bad outcome.
I'm not trying to change your mind about this. But I am trying to establish
that it is Reagan who brought about the change. Previous Republicans such as
Eisenhower, Nixon, and Ford had made their peace with the welfare state. Their
view was that Republicans would run programs with greater attention to fiscal
responsibility than Democrats. Reagan, by contrast, proclaimed that "government
is not the solution, government is the problem." He launched a principled
attack on the notion that government is more capable of running the country
than the private sector. And we have Reagan to thank (or blame) for the era
that we're living in now: the era of the entrepreneur.

            So what about the Soviet Union? My view is that two
people deserve the credit for the fall of the evil empire: Reagan and
Gorbachev. Of these two, Reagan deserves the greater praise because he
predicted the collapse of the Soviet regime, intended the outcome, and
implemented policies aimed at producing that result. Gorbachev, by contrast,
desperately tried to save the regime, adopted glasnost and perestroika to that end, and saw the system blow up in
his face.

            Your theory, which is that the Soviet empire suffered
from "grave internal weakness" and collapsed of its own weight, makes little
sense to me. If you are referring to economic inefficiencies, I am not aware of
any weaknesses that the Soviets suffered in the '80s that were not also present
during the '70s (or the '60s, or the '50s, or any decade since the Bolsheviks
came to power). The Soviet economy has always been a basket case and the butt
of grim jokes.

            Moreover, even if the '80s dramatized Soviet economic
incompetence because the U.S. economy was growing so rapidly, this is no reason
for the Soviet empire to implode in the way that it did. There is simply no
historical precedent for a large empire calling it quits because it could not
compete economically or technologically. As you know, the Roman and the Ottoman
empires suffered from "grave internal weaknesses" but persisted for centuries.
Why should a ruling elite give up power because the gross national product is
declining or because the country is falling behind technologically?

            I cannot hope to settle this large issue here. Nor am I
claiming that Reagan single-handedly produced the result. The pope was
critical, especially in Poland. Margaret Thatcher, Lech Walesa, and Vaclav
Havel all performed important supporting roles. And the West benefited from the
appointment of Gorbachev, an incompetent but good-natured fellow who played his
part as the opposing team's quarterback who kept throwing interceptions.

            But Reagan was the prime architect of Soviet collapse.
He united the Western coalition, and he led Gorbachev over the precipice. I
honestly believe that if Reagan and Gorbachev had not come to power when they
did--if Brezhnev had lived, and if Carter had served a second term, and Mondale
and Dukakis had succeeded him--the Soviet empire would be intact today. I asked
Czech president Vaclav Havel about this when he came to Washington a few years
ago, and he agreed wholeheartedly with my analysis. And Henry Kissinger, no fan
of Ronald Reagan, acknowledges in his book Diplomacy that Reagan's role in bringing about the end of the
Soviet empire represents "the greatest diplomatic feat in the second half of
the twentieth century."

            I think history will vindicate that judgment. I don't
expect today's generation of historians, many of whom opposed Reagan all their
lives, to admit their errors. But the new generation of historians, who won't
have a personal stake in opposing Reagan, will recognize his achievement. As
for me, I wrote my book about Reagan because I'd like to see him get at least
some of the recognition he deserves during his lifetime.

            Best,
Dinesh

         
      
   
