
   
   
      
         
            Moralityland on a Roll
            

            Ahh Mim,

            Good morning. The Coca-Cola isn't cutting it. I think I
want a scotch with my toast. The need to rant is upon me. So soon after the
Brooklyn Museum, we are right back in Moralityland with something called the
Catholic League for Religious and Civil Rights, and its leader Bill Donohue,
wanting to scourge the movie Dogma from silver
screens everywhere because, among other things, they don't like Alanis
Morissette being cast as God. (Click here for David Edelstein's take on the controversy.)
The League has so far managed to create picket lines and scare off Disney and
Miramax, and this is nonsense is getting tired. I don't picket churches, even
though I find the Doctrine of Transubstantiation makes me queasy, and I don't
raise a crew to protest Adam Sandler's insulting my intelligence. I simply let
it slide and ignore it. It's only a joke, stupid. Ben Affleck and Matt Damon
are falling angels who only fall as far as Wisconsin after being too zealous at
Sodom and Gomorrah. Get it? I can hardly blame Director Kevin Smith
( Clerks , Chasing Amy )
for complaining that no one's going after the current box-office leader
Stigmata , which is violent, bloody, highly
anti-Catholic, or for telling the New York Daily
News , "Next time, I'll just make a stupid stoner flick, and leave it
alone." They wear us down by exhaustion. Believe me, I know. I once almost did
two years in jail for publishing the work of Robert Crumb.

            But talking of stupid stoners, a counterattack on
Moralityland just came from the most unlikely quarter. According to CNN, New
Mexico's Republican Gov. Gary Johnson told a less than happy conservative
audience that the legalization of drugs is well overdue. "Regulate them,
control them, but legalize them," declared Johnson, and I can only ask, "What
kept you?" The War on Drugs has been raging through my entire lifetime, and
despite hundreds of billions of tax dollars, the triumphant propaganda of the
DEA, and at least seven administrations, drugs are absolutely everywhere, and
the United States has the biggest per-capita drug-related incarceration rate
this side of Hell. The equation is so damned simple and obvious. The very
illegality of recreational drugs is the risk that creates the vast
profitability. Remove the risk and you remove the profit incentive, and at
least half the problem is solved. Regulation, control, keeping dope away from
minors, and harm-reduction programs become infinitely possible. Of course, one
does still have to fight what might be called the Drug Enforcement Industry, a
modest but powerful branch of the Military-Industrial Complex, whose current
leader, Clinton drug tzar Barry McCaffrey, was as dismissive of Gov. Johnson as
he is of any discussion of legalization. He's got bigger fish to fry. He was,
after all, recently handed $2 billion to kindle his own covert brush war in
Colombia.

            I was also going to rant on about the Patient Bill of
Rights, and why I really want Warren Beatty to run, but that'll have to come
later. Maybe after the bars have opened.

            Love,
Mick

         
      
   
