
   
   
      
         
            Hitler Endorses Buchanan

            
               USA
Today leads with the AFL-CIO's scheduled debate today at its national
convention over the union's possible presidential endorsement of either Al Gore
or Bill Bradley. Although the union is meeting in Los Angeles, the Los Angeles
Times front has only a postage-stamp-sized reefer to its Page B1
AFL-CIO story, choosing instead to follow up on its Saturday lead, the Mexican
flood/mud aftermath, a story nobody else fronts. The LAT 's emphasis
today is on the spreading unrest among some 200,000 displaced survivors
demanding faster distribution of food and water. The New York Times ,
which fronts the AFL-CIO, leads with the Clinton administration's strong
opposition to European Union thoughts of supplying heating oil and other aid to
Yugoslavia. The U.S. concern, says the Times , is that such supplies
might shore up Slobodan Milosevic's political position by alleviating public
discontent. The line the U.S. has drawn is relieving ordinary Serbians'
suffering, yes, rebuilding Serbia, no. The Washington Post , often thought to be hung up on the federal
government, homebodies in a big way, with three of its six front-pagers
twanging local instead. The paper stuffs the AFL-CIO convention and leads with
the resignation of the head of a Virginia county government.

            
               USAT 's AFL-CIO coverage lends plenty of credence to the idea that the
organization is genuinely undecided about Gore vs. Bradley. In the third
paragraph it quotes Gore saying he's uncertain of the outcome and waits until
the eighth to quote a union official who thinks Gore has "a good chance." By
contrast, both the NYT and WP say Gore is "assured" of the
union's endorsement. The Wall Street Journal is a bit less emphatic, saying that
pro-Gore union leaders now say they have the votes.

            Both USAT and the Post include an observation that impugns the
choice's significance: If the union does indeed make a choice now, it will be
its earliest endorsement since going for Walter Mondale. (The WP says
that was in 1983, USAT says 1984.)

            The NYT and USAT front the decision by Colt Manufacturing, a leading maker of handguns (and, the
NYT points out in a nice historical touch, the inventor of the
six-shooter), to abandon much of its retail handgun business. The company will
still sell to law enforcement and the military but will basically stop selling
weapons to civilians who aren't collectors of old-style commemorative guns.
Apparently, the company's motivation is to avoid legal liability and money
damages possibly arising from verdicts in any of the lawsuits currently being
brought by various local governments. The Colt shift was discovered by
Newsweek , a fact mentioned in the second paragraph at USAT , in
the eighth at the Times .

            An inside NYT piece by Felicity Barringer makes an observation that
raises deep questions about the media's true values: In the week following the
simultaneous breaking of well-researched allegations of a U.S. massacre of
civilians during the Korean war and of the Jesse Ventura Playboy
interview, less and less was said about the former and more and more was said
about the latter.

            The WSJ reports that the British government has instructed physicians
in the National Health Service not to prescribe the new anti-flu drug from
Glaxo. Given that this is what the headline says, the reader might well
conclude that the Brits believe that the drug is dangerous. That's why it's a
mistake for the Journal to wait until the fifth paragraph to mention
that the U.K. government merely thinks that the drug isn't cost-effective.

            The WP gives op-ed space to Pat Buchanan so that he can continue to develop his foreign
policy position on World War II. Der Patzer tries to firm up his view that
before Germany's declaration of war on the U.S., it posed no strategic threat
to this country, today including an appeal to ... Hitler, who said, "Everything
I undertake is directed against Russia. If the West is too stupid and too blind
to comprehend that, I will be forced to come to an understanding with the
Russians, to smash the West and then after its defeat, to turn against the
Soviet Union." Gee, wonder why Buchanan didn't quote the clearest thing Hitler
ever said about his plans?--"The Sudetenland is the last territorial claim I
have to make in Europe."

            The LAT fronts a report about tighter rules regarding personal uses
of office computers and how companies are increasingly using sophisticated
tracking technology to enforce them. Examples in the story of concerns where
the new technology and the worker resentment it breeds are in evidence:
AT&T, Pacific Bell, the FCC, Delta Airlines, Exxon, the State Department,
the Department of Veterans Affairs, and Lockheed Martin. There's one company
that almost surely is a hotbed for this issue that the story makes no mention
of: the LAT .

         
      
   
