
   
   
      
         
            On Rereading G&uuml;nter Grass

            Since Günter Grass won his Nobel Prize a week ago, critics have argued that
Grass' political views make him a parody of a left-wing German intellectual:
Who can take seriously a man who mourns the lost asceticism of East Germany?
But the question the Swedish Academy forces us to address is not whether Grass
is a Soviet apologist. The question is, is he now or has he ever been a great
novelist?

            Pretty much everyone agrees that Grass is not a great novelist now. Nothing
he has written since 1963, when he completed his first three novels-- The
Danzig Trilogy , that is, which is made up of The Tin Drum , Cat
and Mouse , and Dog Years --is memorable, and a lot of it is bad. That
includes The Flounder , published in the United States in 1978, an epic
disquisition on the perfidy of women (Grass' leftism does not extend to
feminism) that is narrated by a fish and continues through centuries, with
asides on matters of sexual and culinary history. Culturebox has not read
Grass' 1987 novel The Rat , but Ian Buruma has described it as "tales of
the end of mankind, with the German chancellor riding through the forest in
which concentration-camp victims disguised as mutilated fairy-tale characters
were roaming around the poisoned trees." ("This typically German combination of
dark ecology and Nazi trauma found such disfavor," Buruma continues, "that
Grass went off to India to sulk.") Last week, Culturebox read large chunks of
Grass' latest novel, The Century , to be published in the United States
this December, and it seemed like a decidedly minor book--a Ragtime -like
fantasia comprising 100 short monologues, each narrated by someone with some
connection to one of the past 100 years, none of them with E.L. Doctorow's wit
or affection. In any case, the Swedish Academy has explained why it gave Grass
the prize--because of his first novel, The Tin Drum , published in
1959.

            The Swedish Academy's defense of their selection echoes the conventional
wisdom on The Tin Drum for the past 40 years: that it made German
literature plausible after the Holocaust had made it impossible. Specifically,
said the Academy, The Tin Drum brought German literature back to life
"after decades of linguistic and moral destruction." This statement harks back
to a famous 1958 essay by the literary critic George Steiner, who asked
"whether the German language had survived the Hitler era, whether words
poisoned by Goebbels and used to regulate and justify Belsen could ever again
serve the needs of moral truth and poetic perception."

            What is it about The Tin Drum that unpoisoned the German language and
made it safe for moral truth? The novel tells the story of Oskar Matzerath, who
was born in 1928 in Danzig (as Grass himself was), a city on the border between
Germany and Poland. Oskar possesses an adult awareness from birth but develops
a powerful revulsion against the petit-bourgeois society in which he finds
himself, so at the age of 3 he decides to stop growing up. This he achieves by
throwing himself down cellar stairs. Thereafter he plays a tin drum in lieu of
speaking aloud and, when anyone tries to take it away, screams so shrilly that
he shatters glass all around him. Kept home from school, he becomes an
unblinking observer of the world around him--his mother's adultery, the rise of
Nazism, Kristallnacht , the invasion of Poland, the ravages of war, and
after the war, the "economic miracle."

            Contrary to the popular understanding of the book, Oskar does not provide
its moral center. He is not anti-Nazi, nor does his story per se serve
as a critique of Nazi-era Germany. Whenever people claim that The Tin
Drum is an anti-Holocaust novel, they invariably cite two scenes. In the
first, Oskar, sheltered under a rostrum at a Nazi rally, disrupts the
proceedings by pounding out the three-quarters-time beat of a waltz and
confusing the marching band, so that everyone waltzes off. The second scene
occurs during Kristallnacht , the night of broken glass when the Nazis
destroyed most of the synagogues and many of the Jewish-owned stores in
Germany: Oskar discovers that the Jew who sells him his tin drums has committed
suicide in his store, while storm troopers rampage around his corpse, poking it
with puppets and dropping their pants to shit on the floor.

            It soon becomes clear, however, that neither Oskar's drumming nor his
thoughts on the Jewish toy-store owner are politically motivated. He is a
perfectly amoral character with the self-absorption of a child; an observer but
not a critic, a participant who neither is nor isn't a responsible party, he's
Grass' disturbingly neutral allegory of the German people. Later, Oskar will
willingly play his drum for Nazi officials. Nor is the Jew a sympathetic
character. In an earlier scene, he seemed a figure from a Nazi-era movie: a Jew
obsessed with a German woman, in this case Oskar's mother, whom he begs on
bended knee to run away with him to London.

            If The Tin Drum has a negative take on Nazism, it is expressed
obliquely, through explosive bursts of irreverent language, and by dint of the
fact that, in 1959, Grass talks about things such as
Kristallnacht --something few other German writers did at the time, at
least not so boldly. In the toy-store scene, for instance, Oskar says of a
neighbor who also took part in the great national pogrom, though he wasn't in
that particular store: "Meyn was not there," he says, "just as the ones who
were there were not somewhere else"--a swipe at all the Germans who claimed not
to have been around whenever Nazi crimes took place. Culturebox has not read
the book in German, but those who have say the writing is stuffed with
similarly witty phrasing. The German critic Hans Magnus Enzensberger has
written of how Grass ranges with masterly skill from high-flown parodies of
Catholic litany to the impersonal tone of case histories to slang to dialect
and so on.

            But does relentless, even brilliant, irony remain an adequate response to
the Third Reich, knowing as we do now so much more than we did then? The German
scholar Ernestine Schlant (the wife of Bill Bradley) doesn't think so. She
recently published a book called The Language of Silence , about German
literature's relationship to the Holocaust, in which she accuses Grass of a
flippant disregard for Germany's victims: "[T]here is an ingrained obtuseness
and insensitivity to those who suffered and died, evident in a language where
silence is veiled in verbal dexterity and a creative exuberance rooted in
pre-Holocaust aesthetics." This seems strong--you can condemn a criminal regime
through an unsympathetic portrayal of its perpetrators as well as through
sympathy for those they killed--but it's true that in 1999, Grass' dance of the
macabre does come off as weirdly timid. Compare the eeriest passages of The
Tin Drum with Daniel Jonah Goldhagen's descriptions of the wintry death
marches by means of which the Nazis killed off most of the remainder of their
concentration-camp prisoners at the end of the war--exercises in pure
surrealism, with skeletons moving slowly through a well-fed German
countryside--and suddenly even Grass' fertile imagination seems
impoverished.

            Grass' sarcasm is a welcome respite from the heavy-handed literalism of so
much contemporary Holocaust narrative, from the 1979 television series
Holocaust (another mass catalyst for German self-awareness) to
Schindler's List to the odious Jakob the Liar . And yet, for all
of Grass' rage at Germany's crimes, the fact that The Tin Drum rarely
names those crimes or explores their existence, and seems so focused on the
souls of the Germans, with little empathy to spare for their victims, makes the
book feel more like a step on the way to something than like the thing
itself--whether that thing be a more moral or simply a greater work of
literature. A few years after the book came out, George Steiner himself doubted
whether Grass really was the savior of German literature that people were
making him out to be in Steiner's name. His quibble was that Grass' efforts to
come up with an adequate description of the brutality of German society had in
many ways brutalized him: "Grass," he writes, "is nearly always too long;
nearly always too loud." But, he concluded, "Totalitarianism makes provincial.
... [Grass'] ponderous gait, the outmoded flavor of his audacities, are part of
the price German literature has to pay for its years in isolation." In short,
The Tin Drum did restore German literature to the world and the world to
German literature. But like Grass himself, what once seemed a masterwork has
been overtaken by history.

         
      
   
