
   
   
      
         
            Reagan for Dummies
            

            Dear Alan:

            How I want to like Edmund Morris. How much I have
looked forward to his book on Reagan. I've heard Morris speak twice at the
American Enterprise Institute, where I work. He is urbane and sophisticated,
and the model of gentlemanliness and charm. When I enrolled at Dartmouth as a
foreign student from India, I met professors who exuded learning and grace and
wit. I wanted to be like that. Edmund Morris is one of them. And, let me be
candid, Ronald Reagan is not. Yet frankness also compels me to acknowledge
that, at the end of the day, Reagan succeeded in his great enterprise and
Morris failed. Reagan was an ordinary man who became an extraordinary leader.
Morris is an educated man who has written a profoundly foolish book.

            One reason Dutch is so disappointing is that
it gives no vivid sense of the situation in America when Reagan was first
elected. When Reagan entered the Oval Office, the landscape looked dismal, both
at home and abroad. Inflation was in double digits, eroding pension plans and
savings accounts; interest rates had reached 21 percent, the highest since the
Civil War; the Soviet bear was on the prowl, having gobbled up 10 countries
between 1974, when South Vietnam fell, and 1979, when the Soviets invaded
Afghanistan. There was an energy crisis, with long lines at the pump and talk
of gas rationing. And who can forget the hostages in Iran, held captive by
mullahs who denounced America as a "great Satan"?

            Reagan promised to bring inflation down, and he did. He
cut taxes to energize economic growth, and after the recession of 1982 the
economy went into a juggernaut of growth that has still not abated. Interest
rates fell, so that new businesses could get loans and families could buy
houses again. Reagan decontrolled gas prices, and the energy crisis
disappeared. The technological revolution accelerated in part due to the
explosion of venture capital that became available in the 1980s. No more real
estate fell to the Soviets under Reagan's watch. Indeed the Soviet empire
itself came under unendurable strains and began to collapse. The Soviets pulled
out of Aghanistan. In 1989, the year Reagan left office, the Berlin Wall came
tumbling down.

            Not many presidents, it's safe to say, can claim a
comparable record of achievement. The 1990s have been peaceful and prosperous,
to be sure, but Clinton inherited a growing economy and a global environment
rid of the Soviet menace and open to American multinationals. Of course,
Clinton deserves some plaudits for preserving Reaganism (this is his true
legacy), but Reagan deserves the lion's share of the credit for turning the
country, and the world, around. Moreover, Reagan articulated a moral vision of
what it means to be an American that I, for one, sorely miss in the 1990s.

            Morris dimly perceives that Reagan is implicated in
these huge events, but he has no idea how or why they happened. Hence the
schizophrenia that is manifest throughout his book. Like some of the petulant
letter-writers who have been weighing in on our exchange, Morris' premise seems
to be that Reagan was, as Clark Clifford once put it, an "amiable dunce." So
Morris tries to apply the premise to the astonishing turnaround of the 1980s.
And it doesn't fit. How could a dunce enjoy the continuous successes that
Reagan did? Maybe Reagan got lucky once or twice, but could luck account for
Reagan's triumphs in the multiple ventures he pursued and the multiple policies
he enacted? Did luck account for how Reagan got elected governor of California,
and then re-elected? After Reagan became president, is luck the true reason
that the seemingly invincible inflation dragon was slain? Reagan wanted a world
in which the market, not the government, runs the economy; by the time he left
office such a world was in the making: more luck?

            Morris knows this is ridiculous, but he cannot figure
it out; he becomes confused. He goes into a long depression. He suffers from
writer's block. Then he "solves" the riddle: Reagan was a dunce with incredible
imagination and will. Never once does Morris question his premise. What if
Reagan was not the dummy that his critics made him out to be? What if Reagan
was intelligent and perceptive, far more imaginative than all his critics put
together, infinitely more resourceful in implementing his agenda, eerily
indifferent to much of the acrimony and pettiness around him, resolute and
far-sighted in keeping his eye on the long ball of history?

            Suddenly the events of the 1980s make sense; Reagan did
them. Morris senses Reagan's involvement, but he does not understand it. He
compares Reagan to a glacier that carved a deep valley. But he is too captive
to his original "dummy" hypothesis to question it and abandon it when it does
not fit the facts. This is why, despite his strenuous efforts, Morris finally
fails to make sense of Reagan and the effects of Reaganism.

            The people around Reagan, like Michael Deaver, who
picked Morris, seem to have assumed that because Morris admired a rugged
outdoorsman like Teddy Roosevelt, the subject of Morris' previous book, Morris
would also like Reagan. But TR was an intellectual and a polymath. He invited
zoologists to the White House to discuss the fine points of botany. TR was
well-bred and self-conscious. He wrote books and quoted poetry. By contrast,
R.R. was a simple guy, self-made, with ordinary interests and no intellectual
pretensions. Visit the Reagan ranch near Santa Barbara, recently purchased by
the Young America's Foundation, and look over Reagan's bookshelf. No Plutarch,
no Shakespeare, not even Whitman or Frost; just Louis L'Amour westerns and
books about horses and copies of Arizona Highways .
Morris, who fancies himself a cultural sophisticate, is obviously appalled. His
suspicions about Reagan are confirmed: Reagan strikes him as a brainless yahoo.
And so Morris finds himself set on his disastrous course that takes up a decade
and a half of his life, ruins his reputation, and does a grave injustice to
Reagan and to history.

         
      
   
