
   
   
      
         
            Saving Out-of-Town News

            Chatterbox just caught up with a Boston Globe article containing the
distressing news that Out-of-Town News, the famous Harvard Square newsstand, is
losing business to the Internet. (Click here to read Computernewsdaily 's reprint of the
Globe piece, by Jordana Hart; Chatterbox found the article while
cruising Jim Romenesko's MediaGossip.com.) According to the Globe piece, the appeal
of paying "up to $9.95 for the Sydney Morning Herald " isn't what it was
before the Sydney Morning Herald (and just about every other hard-to-get
foreign newspaper) was available, gratis, online. Five years ago, Out-of-Town News sold 120 copies of
the Sunday Los Angeles Times, or 100 of the Sunday Miami Herald ;
now it's down to about 10 and eight, respectively. During the past decade, the
newsstand has lost 60 percent of its newspaper retail income.

            This makes Chatterbox, whose news addiction was fed by Out-of-Town News at
an impressionable age, very sad. (It also makes him feel guilty about the times
he purchased a newspaper or magazine from the tartier Nini's Corner newsstand
across the street.) Chatterbox recognizes that it is unquestionably a social
good for the world's newspapers, and electronic publications such as

                  Slate
                and Salon and the clumsily named Intellectualcapital.com , to be available to everyone with a
computer--and not just to Cantabridgians and others lucky enough to live within
walking distance of the small number of newsstands in this country that sell
publications from around the world. Still, Chatterbox hates to think that
Out-of-Town News will become some sort of museum of print, a precious relic of
a bygone age. (As it is, it's been a tad museum-like since the early '80s, when
it relocated to the inside of an antique subway kiosk that fell victim to
late-'70s modernization.) With that in mind, Chatterbox invites readers to
offer up to the Fray (scroll down to see how) suggestions about what
Out-of-Town News should do to stem its losses. Entries mocking the soppy
Harvard sentimentality of this exercise, or Chatterbox's low moral standing (as
a cyberjournalist) to be fretting about this problem, are not welcome.

         
      
   
