
   
   
      
         
            Ventura's Trump Card
            

            Issue 1 is Capitol Hill politics--both the fight over the Comprehensive
[Nuclear] Test Ban Treaty and over health care. Issue 2 is the crossed paths of
Al Gore and Bill Bradley in Iowa over the weekend. Issue 3 is control of the
Reform Party.

            President Clinton's foreign-policy team takes to the chat-show circuit to
argue that rejection of the nuclear-testing treaty would scuttle international
non-proliferation efforts. (Gen. Henry Shelton and Defense Secretary William
Cohen appear on Meet the Press , Secretary of State Madeleine Albright on
This Week , and National Security Adviser Sandy Berger on
Late Edition .) Since the treaty probably cannot muster the 67
Senate votes it needs to be ratified, the president's deputies actually argue
that it should be tabled rather than voted on. Many treaty opponents cite
Indiana Sen. Richard Lugar's assertion that the Pentagon will not have the
computer models to simulate nuclear tests, as promised by Clinton, until 2010.
When George F. Will ( This Week ) asks Albright about this, she responds
only that there is "ongoing work" on computer models. But many treaty advocates
(such as Mark Shields, of the NewsHour With Jim Lehrer ) note that it was President
Bush , no dove, who unilaterally stopped American nuclear
testing--computer models or no computer models.

            Despite the apparent victory of the GOP on short-term treaty ratification,
many pundits see the right-to-sue-your-HMO bill (passed last week in the House
with 68 GOP defectors) as a sign of Republican weakness. Bill Kristol ( This
Week ) notes that since the GOP cried foul when Clinton tried to
prohibit patients from suing their HMOs in 1994 as part of his failed
health-care plan, it's hypocritical for the GOP to side with the HMOs this time
around.

            On Face the Nation , Gary Bauer derides George W. Bush for
"trying to get the Democratic nomination" by attacking "good Republican
conservatives" on Capitol Hill. However, many pundits (such as Capital Gang 's Bob Novak and Al Hunt) think
Bush's move was smart. "I have never seen a candidate for president in my
lifetime who was not the nominee of his party have a better week than George W.
Bush had," intones Mark Shields on both NewsHour and Capital
Gang .

            All the shows taped on Sunday focus on a Saturday-evening Democratic
fund-raiser in Des Moines, which Bradley and Gore attended simultaneously. Gore
was more assertive and, some argue, more personable than in the past. (At the
start of his speech, Gore stepped in front of the podium, looked at
Bradley--who was seated in the audience--and told him to signal his consent to
a debate on Iowa agricultural issues by standing up. Bradley remained seated.)
(To find out why Bradley might be reluctant, click here.) Many on the
Fox News Sunday panel agree that Gore has revived his
campaign: Brit Hume calls his speech "a glimpse" of the endearing, "informal"
Gore that his friends know; Karen Tumulty calls it "the scrappiest performance
we've seen from Al Gore all year"; while David Yepsen says Gore looked
"liberated" and that he "stopped the bleeding" in his campaign. George
Stephanopoulos ( This Week ) says Bradley looked "stunned" after Gore's
speech. But Steve Roberts ( Late Edition ) says Gore was "undignified"
and his hectoring of Bradley was "beneath him," while Bill Kristol said Gore
looked "like an elementary school teacher" in front of the podium. (To learn
why Gore is a bore and Bradley is merely boring, click 
here.)

            The fallout from Gov. Jesse Ventura's now-notorious Playboy interview continues. Grilled on This
Week , Ventura, Ref-Minn., does not apologize but does look more chastened
than he did last weekend on Meet the Press . (Incidentally, he also
says he had lunch with potential presidential candidate Donald Trump last
week.) Appearing on Meet the Press and Late Edition , the
current chairman of the Reform Party--Ross Perot ally Russell Verney--calls for
Ventura to resign and says Perot has not yet ruled himself out of the
presidential race. (This, the pundits note, does not bode well for Patrick
Buchanan's effort to get Perot's backing for the Reform Party's presidential
nomination.) On Meet the Press , the incoming Reform Party
chairman--Ventura ally Jack Gargan--defends Ventura's right to speak, saying
"the people of Minnesota elected him as governor, not pope."

            

               Ivana, Marla ... Buffy?
            

            This week the Fox News Sunday panel takes on the weighty task of
pondering whether a Donald Trump presidential candidacy would have a salutary
effect on the health of the polity. One pressing question: Who would be first
lady? (Trump is unmarried, but he has told Fox host Tony Snow that he
could get hitched "within 24 hours" if need be.) Obligingly, Snow suggests six
suitable matches for The Donald: a) Xena the Warrior Princess, b) Sabrina the
Teenage Witch, c) Pamela Anderson Lee, d) Carmen Electra, e) Buffy the Vampire
Slayer, and of course f) Dennis Rodman. But why is Trump seeking public office
in the first place? The Fox folks have a theory:

            
               Karen Tumulty: "I can't tell what faction [of the Reform
Party] Donald Trump represents. His only rationale for running so far seems to
be he has better-looking women than Warren Beatty."

            
               Brit Hume: "Now that would be a good debate!"

            
               Juan Williams: "Yeah, [Beatty will say,] 'Show me the
evidence.' "

            
               Last Word
            

            From Capital Gang :

            
               Byron Dorgan, D-N.D.: "[Bush is] trying to create an
impression somehow that he's different than the Republican Congress agenda.
[But] his agenda is virtually identical."

Bob Novak: "You're saying that image isn't important in
politics?"

Dorgan: "No, image is important."

Novak: "You'd better believe it."

            [To learn more about all of these stories and find links to the smartest
commentary on them, visit The Week/The
Spin.]

         
      
   
