
   
   
      
         
            George W., Land Reformer
            

            Dear Steve:

             Hey, good illustrations. The one thing that really bummed
me about being paired up with you to do this Breakfast Table gig was knowing
that you'd effortlessly outdraw my sorry ass, and that's even when you've got a
color pallette tied behind your back. Well, at least I have my new,
post-Central Asian Diet Plan waistline--lose 36 pounds in 28 days! (really)--to
comfort me.

            I'm glad you brought up the weirdness of the George Quincy Bush (yes! let's
nominate the frat-boy son of a loser do-nothing president!) campaign. On my Los
Angeles radio show this past Saturday I did a facetious "Welcome to the Left"
bit embracing GWB's new move to the progressive side. I announced that I had it
on good authority that he was going to end capitalism, nationalize industry,
eliminate pay inequity, and institute forced collectivization, all while
playing Billy Bragg's "Waiting for the Great Leap Forward" underneath my
monologue. I went too far by reminding voters that Clinton turned out not to be
lying about being a New Democrat (i.e., conservative Democrat), so perhaps Bush
is telling the truth about really caring about poor people. (Hey, maybe he's
rebelling against dad late in life.)

            In any event, my lines were jammed with callers seemingly unaware of the
joke; several worried aloud that May 4 th farms were around the
corner from next November. Ah, if only it were true. But the point here remains
sound--the two-party system, perhaps the most stupid political structure ever
conceived, is dead if you can convince people that Bush is a leftist and
Clinton can still pass himself off as a liberal after pushing through NAFTA,
GATT, and that rancid welfare-reform bill--not to mention signing countless
death warrants as governor of Arkansas. Personally I'm a fan of European-style
parliamentary democracy; even fringes of the electorate get represented. But at
least with single-party dictatorship, you get efficiency. Two parties give you
paralysis, and worse than that, the illusion of choice between two virtually
identical wholly owned subsidiaries of corporate America.

            As for the Diva (now I'm calling her that!), anyone who worked on that
Dukakis campaign is by definition a moron. I walked in, and right out, of his
New York HQ when I saw how disorganized they were (nobody was there to answer
the phone or unlock the front door), and that was the last time I ever
considered participating in allegedly organized party politics.

            Very truly,
Ted

         
      
   
