
   
   
      
         
            Some Protests Are More Equal Than Others
            

            Dear Mick--

            I am utterly, utterly serious when I say that Buffy the Vampire
Slayer and seriously felt and thought-through opposition to the death
penalty existing as they do cheek by jowl in my life, I consider them to be
perfectly compatible and cohesive elements of a unified world view. Or maybe
not so unified, since, although I still don't agree with you about Miramax, I
see that I agree even less with myself, in that I don't actually think that the
political protests of Catholic, feminist, and gay-rights organizations
regarding their portrayals by the mass media are really of comparable weight,
seeing as only one of these special interests is allied with an extraordinarily
wealthy institution with one of the most coherent and cooperative global
network of outlets in history. I mean, of course, Disney. Kidding! I mean, of
course, the Catholic Church. The New York Post reported yesterday (and
even David Bowie could probably learn a thing or two about self-promotion from
the Post , which today did a story on a Giuliani reference to yesterday's
story) that Arnold Lehman, the director of the Brooklyn Museum, has led the
church into the sin of wrath before, when, as director of the Baltimore Museum
of Art, he co-sponsored a series of films on religious extremism that included
Hell's Angel , a scathing critique of Mother Teresa written and narrated
by Christopher Hitchens. As I recall, his writings on this subject are
eminently rational. While in Baltimore, Lehman also did an exhibition involving
Warner Bros. cartoons, which seemed to bug the Post writer, Rod Dreher,
almost as much.

            To prove my initial point about sociopolitical cheek-by-jowlness, I would
like to conclude by saying that if I have to hear Lenny Kravitz sing "Fly Away"
on that Nissan ad one more time, I am going to consider starting a personal
little war, and like St. Augustine, I would consider it just.

            Love,
Mim

         
      
   
