
   
   
      
         
            Patrick O'Brien's <I>The Last Campaign</I>

            ... hard upon forging
their unexpected alliance amid the quadrennial panoply of the Grand Old Party's
nominating convention, our protagonists, acting in unavoidable response to the
exigencies of a contest dominated by the incumbent's strategy and tactics, set
out for the heartland in a manner similar to his, where, beneath storm-riven
skies suggestive of incunabular Turners, the desperate reality of their task
began to reveal itself, rising like a black basalt orogeny from the soft soils
of internecine enthusiasm.

            Chapter 5

            ... the locomotive, a diesel-burning Class 2900
Santa Fe 4-8-4 that had been constructed in 1943 but had survived the decades
most admirably and now gleamed like a Secret Service agent's lapel pin, was
gaining speed swiftly, its one hundred and five tons departing another
whistle-stop in another anonymous town whose inhabitants clustered where the
rails seemed to converge, their fluttering hands and smiling faces congealed
into a tuberous mirage that already was beginning to deliquesce, its bipedal
spores gamboling away from the station where, only moments before, the
candidates had stood to receive the traditional accolade from the traditional
close-packed crowd.

            The last car, with its
funereal platform and tufts of bunting, gave off a flapping chorus that
enveloped Dole and Kemp as they looked backward down the rails. Around them
edged subalterns, each plucking away like a blue-suited migrant worker the
decorations that went up before each stop. The crew had to work quickly, lest
momentum send the froufrou and gewgaws drifting onto the roadbed. In a minute
the removal had been accomplished, and the two men on whose behalf this
excursion had been undertaken again had the expanded-steel protuberance to
themselves. Even Glassner, for dog's years Dole's body man and coat carrier,
had retired to the common area, where the staff would be attempting its usual
stab at gaiety. They believed in Bob Dole; they had to believe in him, even as
his brooding presence infected the farthest corners of the campaign with an
acidity specific to him. His people would never admit what he was admitting:
that the prize he had chased almost all his adult life was bound to elude him
in the most humiliating manner.

            His capacity for gloom had ever equalled his capacity for
work, but he could never have foreseen his worst musings out-galloped by the
campaign of 1996, a broken-backed stumble in which no error was too small to
convert into an enormous problem. He had, in his wretched twenties, dangling by
a wrecked arm on a homemade exercise gibbet, accepted, no, hugged to himself
the knowledge that life was hard and then you died. It was damnably unnatural,
this state to which he had most ironically ascended. When things were in their
proper order, a buoyant spirit led, not a mordant one, and what was he if not
the most mordant man in America? It was a cruel fate to replay in parallax the
role he had taken decades back with the affable Ford, a man who, like Kemp,
could be counted on to float above any malaise like an empty water cask. It was
as if he had been struck by a hail of red Kryptonite and instantly become the
Bizarro candidate, immensely strong, yet unable to prevail against the
backward-beating current.

            Dole, who at the rally had projected a steely
excitement, the contained enthusiasm of a veteran politician in firm grip of
his emotions but willing to share with his supporters what bits of them he
must, sank back into himself, simmering in a glumness he wished he could
contain but knew he could not. Terrible things had always happened to him, and
always would; this was only the latest of them, but it was a terrible thing of
a specifically galling nature. He was the most prestigious passenger on a
hell-bound train, a shining doomed conveyance hurtling down a narrow and fatal
track. Through all his trials, darkness had always been his strength, an
obsidian girder holding him to the path; now it stood to crush him and, perhaps
not coincidentally, the entire Republican ticket, which his opponent's
ever-clever propagandists had labeled as "Dole-Gingrich," as if he and the
pumpkin-headed speaker had conspired like Jesuits to ruin the nation.

            Kemp leaned closer,
speaking more loudly than was necessary, perhaps to compensate for the rush of
air around them and the clatter of steel wheels beneath and behind. "Something
preoccupies you, Bob," Kemp said. "I thought that was really neat back there,
didn't you?"

            It was Kemp's habit to voice such banalities in an utterly
unironical manner, a gift of naiveté withheld from Dole since birth and made
even more distant by life. Why could he not have been born a Kemp, blessed by
luck and genes with the smiling disposition of a boy who is shown a stable full
of ordure and instantly concludes that there must be a pony in there somewhere?
Dole was sentenced to always know better than what he wanted to believe.

            "Yes, most assuredly," he replied, struggling not to
answer with a grunt. "I sense we might profit from a few minutes out of the
weather." Of course, there was no "weather" to speak of; but he had learned a
thousand years ago that sometimes, he had to say something.

            "Certainly," his running mate said, stepping aside
so the older man could enter the rail car. He did so with surety, using the
elbow of his bad arm to steady himself at the threshold, then raising both
fists in a stretch. At the far door, a steward stood.

            "Your pleasure, gentlemen."

            "A Diet Coke, if you will, please," Kemp chirped.
"Caffeine free."

            "None for me right the
moment, thanks."

            Dole pulled off his suit jacket and assumed his usual
position in an overstuffed chair on the starboard side of the car. He loosened
his tie. Kemp, still wearing his jacket, did likewise.

            "What troubles you, my friend?" he asked again. "Is
it the poll numbers? The back-bounce? We have as yet seven weeks to do the
things we must. Do not despair."

            "As you know, 'despair' is not in my vocabulary,"
Dole said, leaning suddenly so that he was looking Kemp in the eye. He wanted
to bark out the syllable that had become his hated signature, but did not. Damn
the myopic but all-seeing eyes of that news-ferret Cramer for having the cruel
wit to reduce him to an onomatopoeia. No longer could he essay an "Aaargh" in
public or private without apprehending in his marrow that he had become what he
was described as being.

            "No, what is on my mind is the damnable situation
into which we have been thrust by this contest," Dole continued, rising to his
feet. "Clinton and his railroad trick have forced us into a like strategy. I
would vastly prefer to travel by aeroplane--there is no substitute for the
swiftness, the ease, the comfort--but here we are, bumping along the ground
like a crippled millipede, waging a campaign that could have been waged in the
latter days of the last century."

            "But surely, Bob, you must acknowledge the romantic
appeal of the tactic," Kemp said. "At Nixon's grave, remember, it was you who
invoked the whistle in the night, the long rumbling procession of cars carrying
someone else somewhere else."

            "Yes, yes, I recall my eloquence all too well,"
Dole said, exasperated at having been caught in the web of his own rhetoric.
"But I was not running for president then."

            Kemp grinned impishly. "Bob, you have been running
for president since 1976," he said. "What would you say to a little game,
something to take our minds away from the press of combat?"

            The suggestion relaxed Dole. "Excellent," he said.
"Let us commence with a session. I will wait on the platform while you make
ready."

            Kemp, velellidous mop
shining like the crest of a blow-dried raptor, reached for their instruments.
Upon joining the ticket, he had instantly made it his habit to maintain the
equipment.

            Amid the clotted air on the platform, Dole let his eyes
ease into the night. "Bob, my friend!" Kemp called from the center of the
railway car. He was holding up a pair of grey rectangles, linked by a black
umbilicus and each winking a single garnet eye. "Excellent news! I have found
the Game Boys. The batteries are as fresh as new flounder. Lose not a
minute."

            Dole could never have predicted that in this, his
grimmest hour, after all these years of morosely pursuing the presidency, he
would come to enjoy as his particular friend a chronically cheery former
footballer who could broadcast an enthusiasm for gimcrack economic theory in
such a way that one could not tell if he was embracing it or mocking it. Now,
as he squinted at the red lights in Kemp's fists and felt his companion's boon
personality radiating in his direction, he also faced the knowledge that life
was more durable than pain, more difficult than you could have imagined, and
yet still you lived, as he now lived, seeing that his last campaign, the battle
to the candidacy, would be his last success. He stepped inside and closed the
door on the wind.

         
      
   
