
   
   
      
         
            The Norplant Option

            Now that Congress and
President Clinton have opted to use the threat of utter destitution to dissuade
poor teen-agers and women from having children on the public dole, it's time to
revive a more humane, and perhaps more effective, proposal with the same
objective.

            This idea surfaced briefly
and spectacularly in 1990, when the Philadelphia Inquirer suggested in
an editorial that perhaps some welfare mothers should be "offered an increased
benefit" if they would agree to practice effective birth control--specifically,
to use the then-new Norplant contraceptive, which prevents pregnancy for five
years after being implanted under the skin of the upper arm.

            An uproar
followed. The editorial writers--who had insensitively suggested a desire to
reduce births of poor black babies in particular--were savaged by many
Inquirer staffers and others as racist advocates of eugenics, even of
"genocide." They also caught it from some abortion-rights zealots, who are
suspicious of any government efforts to influence reproductive choices, and
from conservatives, who think the only proper way to discourage teen pregnancy
is to preach abstinence. The newspaper abjectly apologized for a "misguided and
wrongheaded editorial opinion." And ever since, the whole subject has been
taboo.

            
But it's still a good idea, for poor girls and
women themselves, and for the rest of us. Millions of babies are being born to
poor teen-agers so lacking in elementary skills, work habits, and
self-discipline that they are unlikely to be either responsible parents or
self-supporting providers. Many of these babies grow up in squalor and
themselves become dependent denizens of the welfare culture.

            The only
realistic hope for breaking the bleak cycle of teen pregnancy and welfare
dependency is to find ways to persuade poor teen-agers not to have babies--at
least, not until they are old enough, and capable enough, and self-supporting
enough to provide a decent home life. But nobody--nobody--has any great ideas
for realizing this hope, short of reverting to the cruelest, let-'em-starve
brand of social Darwinism.

            
Thoughtful progressives like Sen. Daniel
Patrick Moynihan, D-N.Y., have properly stressed the need to push welfare
mothers into jobs and job-training programs. This makes sense because some of
these women will rise to the occasion, learn the work ethic, and become
self-supporting. And others may be dissuaded from having children by the
prospect of being required to work. But (as Moynihan acknowledges) many welfare
mothers are so crippled by their own early childhood environments as to be
essentially unemployable, no matter how well-financed and well-run the jobs
programs and related counseling, training, and child-care programs.

            And under the harsh new
welfare reform, the jobs programs will not be well financed. It appears that
millions of welfare mothers and children will simply be cut off--unable to get
or hold jobs, and left to beg from relatives and strangers, to steal what they
can, even to sleep on the streets, depending on how much Calcutta-style misery
the taxpayers are willing to tolerate.

            Given the
stark ugliness of trying to end the welfare culture by spreading homelessness
and hunger, it's especially striking that one pretty good, pretty humane idea
has been virtually ignored in the welfare debate of the past year.

            
In a small effort to reopen discussion of this
option, here's a specific proposal: States should experiment with programs in
which all qualifying teen-agers and women would be offered lump-sum $1,000 cash
payments--on top of any other benefits they receive--to have Norplant (or
another long-term contraceptive) implanted at government expense. They would be
free to have it removed whenever they chose, but would be rewarded with
additional payments (of, say, $30) for each month in which they kept it.

            The
category of qualifying teen-agers and women could include all recipients of
welfare or other public assistance (including daughters of recipients) who are
competent to give informed consent to the implant procedure. Or the program
could be restricted in various ways in order to blunt possible objections. For
example, you could require parental consent. Or, eligibility could be
restricted to those who have already been pregnant, or at least sexually
active; to those over age 13, or under age 21; or some combination thereof.

            
Why Norplant? Because it requires no ongoing
effort or supervision to be effective, and it can be discontinued only after
some (rather small) effort. As such, Norplant is the only contraceptive the
government could pay people to use with any hope of affecting those who aren't
strongly motivated to either become pregnant or avoid pregnancy.

            How much
good the Norplant option would do is debatable. But the arguments that it would
do harm seem unpersuasive. Here's a quick review of possible objections, left
and right:

            
B ribing poor women and girls to implant
Norplant would coerce them into not having children, thus violating their
rights to reproductive choice, like the one-child-per-family policy and coerced
abortions in China.
            

            To the contrary, a government
offer of money is not coercion--and not even remotely comparable to what goes
on in China. Existing benefits would not be reduced for anyone declining
Norplant. This means that nobody who really wanted a child would be prevented
from having one. To be sure, the government would be trying to influence
reproductive choices. But the same is true of existing policies promoting free
contraception, and of laws like the Hyde Amendment, which denies Medicaid
funding for abortions--not to mention the still extant statutes making it a
crime to commit statutory rape (sex with a consenting minor), fornication
(premarital sex), and adultery.

            In its groveling 1990
editorial apology, the Inquirer said: "Our critics countered that to
dangle cash or some other benefit in front of a desperately poor woman is
tantamount to coercion. They're right." No, they were wrong, and the
Inquirer was right in its initial Norplant editorial, when it noted that
women would be free to "change their minds at any point and become fertile
again."

            "Many
people," David Boldt, then-editor of the Inquirer's editorial page, noted in a
subsequent commentary, "saw the editorial as part of an ongoing white
conspiracy to carry out genocide of blacks in America."

            This is
pernicious nonsense, no matter how many people say it. The original
Inquirer editorial unwittingly invited such smears by linking its
Norplant proposal to race--specifically, to a report that nearly half the
nation's black children are living in poverty. But nobody is proposing that
race be a factor in any program promoting Norplant to welfare recipients, most
of whom are white. Nobody is proposing to sterilize women or forbid them from
having children. And while a disproportionate percentage of welfare mothers and
children are black, black America, like white America, can only benefit from
any program that rewards people for avoiding pregnancy unless and until they
are old enough and self-supporting enough to provide decently for children.

            
G irls and women on Norplant may be at
greater risk of contracting and spreading AIDS, because they will be less
likely to demand that their sex partners use condoms.
            

            A 1994
study reported in The New England Journal of Medicine found that
Norplant had no effect on recipients' decisions whether to use condoms or visit
doctors--and was 19 times as effective as the pill in preventing pregnancy. Any
Norplant incentive program should include vigorous counseling about the need to
use condoms against disease. But even now, how many women and girls are so much
more afraid of pregnancy than of death that they use condoms solely to avoid
the former, and would stop once on Norplant? Not many, I suspect.

            
N orplant itself may be unhealthy.
            

            The
possibility of serious long-term health damage from any relatively new
contraceptive like Norplant must be taken seriously, and the risks should, of
course, be fully disclosed to women considering using it. But no contraceptive
is risk-free. And the available evidence indicates that the risks inherent in
pregnancy and childbirth--and in abortion--are at least as great as the risks
inherent in Norplant.

            Plaintiffs' tort lawyers
have nearly killed off Norplant, scaring away many women and doctors, by a
torrent of personal-injury suits against its manufacturer. The lawyers include
many of the same folks who created a tidal wave of litigation based on the
apparently bogus claim about the dangers of silicone breast implants. But the
Food and Drug Administration has repeatedly found Norplant to be safe and
effective. More than a million women have used it with only minor side effects,
such as changing menstrual bleeding patterns, reported.

            There
have been complaints by a small percentage of Norplant users of severe pain or
scarring from having it removed. But the apparent reason was inadequate
training of physicians in the (usually quick and painless) removal
procedure--an easily remedied problem--and not any inherent defect in the
product.

            
I t is sexist to seek to thrust contraception
only upon women.
            

            Sexism has nothing to do with
it. First, almost all welfare checks are written to women--not to men, who
don't get pregnant. Second, the only forms of contraception now available for
men are condoms and vasectomies. It would hardly make sense to hand out $1,000
payments to men for taking home a bunch of condoms, or to try to police their
use. And a vasectomy--unlike a Norplant implant-- cannot always be
reversed.

            
               Giving teen-agers
contraceptives encourages promiscuity, and bribing them to use Norplant will
encourage it even more.
            

            The weight
of the evidence suggests that teen-agers' decisions whether or not to engage in
sexual activity don't have much to do with whether the government gives them
contraceptives. Many have unprotected sex, and almost all can get
contraceptives if they want them. As I have suggested, one possible restriction
(although not one I would favor) on any Norplant incentive program would be to
limit eligibility to teen-agers who have already been pregnant or, at least,
sexually active. Norplant counselors could also stress the benefits of
abstinence, while presenting the contraceptive as a backup safeguard.

            
T een-agers should learn about sex and
contraception from their parents, not the government.
            

            A parental-consent
requirement would answer this objection. I would not advocate such a
requirement, however, because of the overwhelming evidence that many parents
have little or no constructive communication with their children about such
matters. I hope that my own two daughters (now 12 and nine years old) would
consult with me and my wife before getting Norplant or becoming sexually
active. But if they end up deciding to go their own ways, I'd rather that they
have unrestricted access to Norplant than that they risk pregnancy.

            Would a
Norplant program be thwarted by the fact that many poor teen-agers actually
want to get pregnant and have a child? I don't think so. First, there are about
3 million unwanted pregnancies in the United States every year, half of which
end in abortion. Many of these involve teen-agers and women who are (or will
be) on welfare. Norplant could stop almost all these. Second, the allure of
pregnancy for many other poor teen-agers may be so slight, or so fleeting, or
so fraught with ambivalence, that a $1,000 Norplant incentive would have plenty
of takers.

            
And even if such a program only delayed
pregnancies a few years, that would be a very good thing. Most 15-year-olds
would be better mothers, and have a better chance of making something of their
own lives, if they waited five or seven years before having babies.

            Norplant is no panacea for
poverty; nothing is. The question is whether a Norplant incentive program might
do some good. There's only one way to find out: Give it a try. If it fails, the
cost--in terms of numbers of teen-agers and women taking the $1,000 offer--will
be tiny. And it just might help.

         
      
   
