
   
   
      
         
            Gimme Some Skin

            
               Cruella
De Vil, Cruella De Vil,If she doesn't scare you,No evil thing will.
            

            If your multiplex is like my
multiplex (and whose multiplex isn't?), when you go to a screening of 101
Dalmatians , you will see six previews. Here is what Hollywood is preparing
for America's children: a cat movie, another cat movie, an ape movie, another
ape movie, a dog movie, and another dog movie. In the second dog movie, the dog
shares top billing with a dolphin.

            The coming plague of animal
films is nothing new. The last few years have witnessed Babe
(animatronic pigs, dogs, sheep), several Homeward Bound s (dog and cat),
a couple of Free Willy s (whale), and countless others I have,
mercifully, been able to forget. Everywhere you turn, some movie is preaching
interspecies comity and rhapsodizing about animals' superhuman intelligence.
Any day now I expect my cat to strike up a conversation with me, probably about
his three-picture deal with Castle Rock.

            No movie embraces animal
propaganda with as much enthusiasm as the new 101 Dalmatians , Disney's
live-action version of its old animated feature. It is the heartwarming animal
movie distilled into its purest form. The cuddliest animals (Dalmatian puppies)
are threatened with the most horrible fate (clubbing, skinning, being turned
into fur coats) at the hands of the most villainous villainess, Cruella De Vil.
(Strangely, we are supposed to revile Cruella for designing fur coats, yet root
for the hero, Roger, who designs violent, mind-numbing, soul-destroying video
games.)

            
Naturally, Cruella gets her comeuppance--a variety of Home Alone- style
agonies inflicted by farm animals . This teaches the requisite moral
lesson: It is far better to torture a human being than to allow a single puppy
to come to harm. In the end, the Dalmatians and their human masters live
happily ever after. Children cheer. Animal-rights groups coo. Parents drive to
the Pet Pantry to buy Dalmatian pups for Christmas.

            After watching 101 Dalmatians , I too wanted to drive
to Pet Pantry to buy Dalmatian pups ... and skin 'em. After 103 hectoring
minutes of the movie, I wondered: What's wrong with Cruella De Vil? What's
wrong with a Dalmatian fur coat? And where can I buy one? How much is that
doggie in the window? While the ASPCA and PETA chapters compose their indignant
letters to the editor and heat their vats of oil to a rolling boil, let me
explain.

            There's nothing wrong with
Dalmatians that a good furrier couldn't fix. The movie 101 Dalmatians
promises dogs that are good-natured, healthy, intelligent, resourceful,
gorgeous. Except for the last part, this is a lie. Dalmatians are high-strung.
They're hyperactive. They bark too much. They're bad with children. They shed
constantly. They're hard to train. (The Dalmatians don't even perform tricks in
101 Dalmatians . An Airedale does the tough stunts; the Dalmatians merely
bark on cue.) They're ill-suited to living indoors. Many of them are deaf, and
all of them are dumb. They are, in short, lousy pets.

            This
inspires an equation: Beauty plus difficult temperament equals fur. We do it to
minks. We do it to foxes. Why not to Dalmatians? Cruella has it right. A fur
coat preserves what is desirable about Dalmatians--their beauty--and eliminates
what is undesirable--everything else.

            
There are two main objections to Dalmatian fur
coats. The first is principled: Fur is wrong. It barbarically exploits animals,
it's unnecessary, and so on. To this, I offer only the standard fur-industry
reply: Fur farming doesn't have to be cruel. Minks live longer on fur farms
than they do in the wild. Dalmatians, one imagines, could roam more freely on a
large farm than in a cramped urban apartment. And Dalmatian farmers would not
simply kill Dalmatians for their fur. Dog meat is prized in other parts of the
world. (It used to be in the United States, too; on his Western expedition with
Clark, Meriwether Lewis raved about it.) Dalmatian farmers can set up shop in
places where dog meat is eaten. Maybe Dalmatian burger is an ecologically
efficient substitute for beef (though it might dampen enthusiasm for McDonald's
current 101 Dalmatians promotional campaign).

            The
second objection to Dalmatian farming is visceral. The mere thought of farming
dogs for fur nauseates you. With this objection, I sympathize. Dogs are
charming. People love their dogs, even their Dalmatians. They see something
grotesque in the idea of making them into winter outerwear. It offends common
decency.

            Yet, we do cruel things to animals--smart animals,
affectionate animals, cute animals--all the time. People raised on farms
understand this. Pigs are sociable, loving, and a hell of a lot brighter than
Dalmatians. Have you seen what gets done to them ? Do farmers weep about
it? Calves are adorable. But veal is delicious.

            Of course, it is argued, the
dog--man's best friend, the family pet--is different. So says modern bourgeois
America, which has turned the pet into a full-fledged member of the nuclear
family, even more sacred than other human beings (such as curmudgeonly aunts).
Disney, by anthropomorphizing its critters, exploits this American
mushy-mindedness, and makes us forget that pets are, in the end, just animals.
But God gave man dominion over the beasts of the earth: If an animal has
economic utility, we should farm it.

            In 1991, when Disney
re-released the animated 101 Dalmatians , demand for Dalmatians soared.
Here is a prediction. This December, it will happen again: Tens of thousands of
children will hound their parents into buying charming Dalmatian pups for
Christmas. As before, many of those charming pups will, in two years, grow up
into charmless dogs. Hundreds of them, perhaps thousands, will be abandoned or
dropped at the pound. They will be shut up in cages. Later, they will be
euthanized.

            Now why is that better than
becoming a fur coat?

         
      
   
