
   
   
      
         
            Tangled Wires

            So Girl Scouts can sing
again. ASCAP, an association of music copyright owners, has stopped trying to
collect royalties on campfire renditions of "This Land Is Your Land." The girls
have a new place to camp, too--a vast stretch of land in Utah that President
Clinton recently declared a "National Monument." Mining's forbidden now. Too
bad for Andalex, which owned the rights to dig for coal.

            Woody Guthrie, who wrote
"This Land Is Your Land," was a Communist. It's your land, but it's my land
too. From California to the New York Island, and probably Utah as well. I'd
quote more, but I'd need permission. Guthrie copyrighted the song in 1956. It
remains the private property of his heirs until 2031. As I said, Guthrie was a
capitalist.

            Most of
us are equally two-faced about property. My property is mine; yours is for
sharing. Put any two toddlers in a room with toys, and you get four political
theorists. End-of-Property stories appeal to some grown-ups too. Karl Marx
finished one in 1894: A tidal wave of workers was going to sweep aside the
obstructive nuisance of private ownership. The 1990s version merely announces
the end of all intellectual property--ownership rights in words, music,
and so on--obliterated this time by a tsunami of new technology. Copying and
transmitting data is becoming too easy for the law to protect anyone's private
ownership. The ribbon of digital highway is for roamin' and ramblin'. Copyright
is dead. Digital content just "wants to be free." See John Perry Barlow, Esther
Dyson, Nicholas Negroponte, Wired ....

            There's an obvious technological rejoinder. Digital content
can be shuffled as easily as it can be transmitted. Encryption puts viscosity
right back into the fluid digital pipeline. Curiously, most of the property
abolitionists seem to like this home-brew form of copyright. There's a strong
economic rejoinder too, as Bob Wright pointed out on these screens not long ago. Most
people won't steal digital content if buying actually remains cheaper and
easier, as it probably will. But the "free the bits" view of things isn't just
inconsistent or unfinished. It's an analysis that hasn't progressed beyond the
Pampers stage of political theory.

            Twenty
years ago, the Supreme Court announced that lawmakers couldn't ban abortions in
the first trimester of pregnancy, but could ban them in the third. A
constitutional line is crossed, Justice Blackmun reasoned, when a fetus becomes
"viable" outside the womb. By that logic, the constitutional right retreats
with every advance in neonatal medicine. When medics learn how to incubate a
test-tube baby for the whole nine months, the abortion right ought logically to
disappear. Except that it won't. Logical consistency has nothing to do with
it.

            
It's a safe political prediction that the legal
rights in intellectual property aren't going to be abolished, however badly
bits may want to be free. Even Hollywood's softie-lefties go all hard and
capitalist when it comes to intellectual property. Jack Valenti, Hollywood's
lead flack in Washington, spent the early '80s trying to kill the new video
cassette recorder, which he was sure would be used mostly to pirate his
clients' movies. Valenti didn't succeed, but only because the VCR ended up
delivering huge profits to the movie moguls. Far more people use VCRs to rent
movies than to steal them.

            But people could
steal movies if they felt like it. The end-of-property cybersages argue that
the law may say what it likes, but the law doesn't matter any more.
Technological might makes right. People with the machines will copy if they
please, and lawyers shouldn't try to stop them. (Unless, of course, those
lawyers work for Wired , which is very actively defending its own
trademark.)

            But this
premise is also wrong. The first point to recognize is that copyright is just a
commercial form of privacy law. Indeed for some, it's the only kind of privacy
they still own. Madonna can no longer stop you from gazing at her breasts.
Copyright at least makes you pay for the pleasure.

            So we've done breasts and we've done abortion; let's move
on to the rest of your private life. Lexis-Nexis recently caused an uproar when
it offered to help personal biographical stuff on its way to freedom, through a
database (P-Trak) accessible at $82 a pop. The Social Security numbers in the
database were removed 11 days after its introduction: technology trumped by
popular protest.

            
Information wanting to be free doesn't seem so appealing when it includes
details about all your own flesh and frailties--credit history, shopping
habits, records of where you've been, what you asked for, and what you took.
Your modem doesn't know the difference between information called "property"
and information called "privacy." And privacy--cloak of night, stocking mask,
and any digital equivalent--is all that separates the thief from the law. The
harder it is to maintain privacy, the easier it is to catch thieves. It's no
use responding that the law itself protects privacy better than copyright
protects a Spielberg movie. If you're a technological determinist, there is no
privacy law, not in cyberspace.

            
Which means that the easier it gets to steal
from Spielberg, the easier it gets for his lawyers to come after you. True,
technology empowers millions of potential copyright violators. But Spielberg
doesn't have to catch them all. Spot enforcement, well-publicized with blue
flashing lights, is what maintains speed limits on the highway.

            If you're
enough of a pirate to be worth bothering about, Spielberg's lawyers will get
you. And the law will then seize your property, like your Pentium Pro, your
ISDN card, and your Jaz drive. That is what has got the
cyberlibertarians so agitated. Do you see the irony? They aren't really
property anarchists--quite the opposite, in fact. They reject the new property
because it threatens their absolute control of the old. My high-speed modem is
mine, so your intellectual property must be mine too. If I really own my modem,
then I must have an unqualified right to dial up anywhere, any time, and suck
in whatever is out there to be sucked. Copyright law in cyberspace offends
because it limits what I can do in physical space. Encryption is OK because its
authority is created in my very own machine.

            From Marx to Lennon ("Imagine no possessions"),
anti-property zealots all miss the most fundamental point. Property is
politically neutral. Sure, property is the capitalist's tool. But the
feminist's, too. And the libertarian's. The woman who wants an abortion says
it's her uterus, not Pat Robertson's. The rancher says it's his
land, not the government-protected wolf's. Your supposed constitutional right
to get an abortion, or smoke dope, or ride a Harley without a helmet, all
emerged from the Fourth Amendment--written originally to protect "houses,
papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures." Whether
you're talking about land, abortion, or environmental protection, you
inevitably drift into the rhetoric of property.

            Property is an endless
succession of bubbles in space, or cyberspace, with different people claiming
an endless variety of interests in them. Property is a bottle of champagne, or
the name of the label, or the whole concept of effervescent wine, or perhaps
just wine in your bloodstream while you drive home in your Buick. Control of
each little bit of turf, physical or virtual, can always be made a bit more--or
a bit less--personal and private. Politicians, prosecutors, judges, and
litigators decide, often one case at a time. The deciding never ends, because
people, and the things they value, change. Technology will never end the tug of
war.

            The only prognosis that's
certainly wrong is that all boundary-setting law will just somehow disappear,
because the Workers of the World have united, or because information wants to
be free.

         
      
   
