
   
   
      
         
            Asian or American?

            Asian-Americans, who so
rarely appear in print or on television, can tell you that the media are no
mirror of the nation's complexion. But they understand that the media do
reflect the nation's psyche--and that is why the events of recent weeks have
been so distressing. First, U.S. intelligence analyst Robert Kim was accused of
spying for South Korea. Then, the John Huang/Lippo scandal broke, raising
suspicions about Asian money in American politics. Suddenly, there was no
shortage of Asian names in the news. Just as suddenly, a question was in the
air: Do Asian-Americans have dual loyalties?

            No one,
to my knowledge, has framed the issue quite so explicitly. William Safire, for
instance, has hyped the so-called "Asian connection" with dark mutterings about
"favor-hungry foreigners," "insidious networking," and "penetration by Asian
interests." The pull quote in his Oct. 10 column--"Selling influence to rich
aliens"--veers into The Protocols of the Elders of Zion territory. But
even Safire felt compelled recently to throw in a "some-of-my-best-friends"
paragraph of praise for hard-working Asian-Americans. The old Nixon hand knows
well that innuendo is effective only if well calibrated.

            Still, the unmistakable subtext of Safire's columns and the
press coverage of the Lippo affair is that Asians in America are just
that--Asians in America, sojourners and foreigners. Thus, when we learned that
Huang had raised over $5 million for the Democrats, little distinction was
made--reportorially or morally--between contributions from abroad and
contributions from Americans of Asian descent. Moreover, Huang's activities,
however unlawful, have now given rise to a presumption that "Asian-American
political participation" is merely a cover for some sinister foreign
agenda.

            Of course,
the notion that Asian-Americans are torn between an outward allegiance to this
country and a hard-wired fealty to some Oriental motherland has a long and
undistinguished pedigree. The indelible Chineseness of Chinese immigrants was
the rationale for the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882. The indelible Japaneseness
of Japanese-American citizens justified their internment after Pearl Harbor.
Small wonder that Asian-Americans have protested the tenor of the Lippo
reportage and the portrayal of Asian-Americans as people with divided
loyalties.

            
But the source of these stereotypes is not
solely white racism, or even the more subtle prejudices of Safire and his ilk.
It is also, to a lesser but still substantial degree, the racialist language of
modern-day identity politics.

            "One ever feels this
twoness--an American, a Negro; two souls, two thoughts, two unreconciled
strivings; two warring ideas in one dark body, whose dogged strength alone
keeps it from being torn asunder." So wrote W.E.B. Du Bois in 1903, describing,
in The Souls of Black Folk , a "double consciousness" that afflicted, yet
graced, the coloreds of his day.

            Nearly a
century later, the metaphor of dual identity endures in our racial narratives.
The notion that minorities are instrinsically alienated from themselves--and
that the struggle is somehow ennobling--is a central tenet of multiculturalist
ideology. We see it in ethnic-studies courses and academic talk of "racial
destiny." We see it in the deconstructions of O.J. Simpson's blackness. We see
it in the ghosts and doppelgängers who populate the melodramas of Amy Tan and
her imitators.

            This bifurcation is intuitively appealing because it makes
concrete the ambivalence of assimilation, the gnawing sense among many people
of color that membership in the mainstream comes at a high personal cost. The
symbolism of split personalities and divided souls also has visceral power. And
there is a certain romance to the imagery, adorning the ordinary lives of
nonwhite folk with the dignity of redemptive suffering.

            But there
is too much that is flawed about this pose. For, what do we presume when we
speak of the minority person's "dual identity"? We presume that "racial
identity" is foreordained and monolithic, and ever at odds with "national
identity." We presume also, as Stanley Crouch has dryly observed, that identity
is never more complex than double.

            
Black nationalists, like their counterparts in
"Asian America" or "Latino Nation," believe that race is primordial, as organic
as gender. But consider the Asian-American: Thirty years ago, there was no such
creature. There were only Americans of Chinese descent, or Japanese, or Indian.
But over the course of a generation, activists and bureaucrats have
manufactured a single race out of a diverse mass of several million people
whose origins can be traced to dozens of countries.

            What has
bound this Asian-American "race" together is not its biological badge--eyelid
folds, hair color, pigmentation--but its cultural content. Through magazines
and campus clubs and advocacy organizations, self-appointed race leaders have
sought to create an "authentic" Asian-American consciousness by inventing
something called "Asian-American culture." The fact that they are succeeding
tells us something about the magnetic appeal of racial fundamentalism. More
importantly, it reminds us that "racial identity" is utterly malleable--and
that "racial essence" is utterly artificial.

            Yet, even if we did believe in the fixity of races, "double
identity" is meaningless unless we also presume that American identity is
immutably white. As the critic Albert Murray has long argued, that wasn't even
true in Du Bois' time. It is even less true now--and not because America, in
the classic pluralist formulation, is a "nation of nations," a neutral holding
pen for various diasporas; nor because America is some dehumanizing,
single-mold "melting pot."

            What gives
lie to anyone's whitewashed vision of national identity--and what makes America
exceptional--is the fact that American culture is more hybridized and
mongrelized than anything humanity has ever before seen. When California
Caucasians are practicing Feng Shui and Zen meditation, when suburban Asian
teens are reciting gangsta rap lyrics, when salsa sales are surging past
ketchup sales, how can we speak with a straight face about the ineffaceable
whiteness of American life? And how then can we sustain the race-nation
opposition central to "double consciousness"?

            
Ultimately, the weakness of the dual-identity
myth is that it reduces humans into bits of binary code. It treats the American
experience as a simple equation plotted along two axes, as if class or gender
or birthplace or birth order or family structure mattered not--as if
contingency never sculpted one's sense of self. And, in the name of
anti-racialism, it recommits the worst errors of racialism: Denying the
minority individual his full, complex humanity; interpreting his voice as the
mere expression of a greater Volksgeist .

            In the milieu of
contemporary multiculturalism, that sort of illogic can be affirming. So long
as color is a proxy for entitlement, there will be many who find it useful to
ostentatiously posit a conflict between their racial core and their assimilated
shell. But the fallout from the John Huang debacle should remind
Asian-Americans that claims of racial loyalty can cut both ways. And it should
remind us all that flimsy notions of the minority's eternally dual identity,
whether tinged with xenophobia or candied with race pride, in the end amount to
just so much double talk.

         
      
   
