
   
   
      
         
            Mother's Little Tax Break

            Signing the
minimum-wage-hike bill last month, President Clinton hailed its passage as a
big victory for the working poor and the Democratic Party. But buried in a tax
package attached to the wage law--and completely missing from most news
coverage--was a small triumph for Texas Republican Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison.
Her sweetener, the so-called Homemaker IRA, would increase the sum that
homemakers are allowed to put away in tax-free Individual Retirement Accounts
from the current $250 to $2,000 a year, raising their IRA savings limit to
match that of their working spouses.

            Hutchison originally
sponsored the bill in 1993; by 1996, over half the Senate had leapt onto the
bandwagon. Endorsements included every group from the Christian Coalition (it
promotes family values) to feminist groups (women would be the prime
beneficiaries). Bob Dole is still endorsing its enactment--even though the plan
is now law. (Dole included Hutchison's proposal in the economic package he
introduced after the minimum-wage bill had sailed through Congress on its way
to a sure presidential signature.)

            With so
broad a constituency behind it, why would anyone oppose the provision? Because
IRAs cost the Treasury money--which must ultimately be made up either by
raising other people's taxes or cutting their benefits. According to an
estimate by the Joint Committee on Taxation, the IRA expansion would cost $267
million in lost revenue over a five-year period, which makes the merits of the
case worth a closer look.

            Supporters of the Homemaker IRA argue that the new benefit
is needed because the current tax code discriminates against single-earner
households. Families with two incomes can put away $2,000 for each spouse,
while one-income households can save only $2,000 for working spouses and $250
for homemakers. It's "another marriage penalty," Hutchison contends.

            By the
"marriage penalty," Hutchison means the quirk in the tax code that pushes
married people into higher tax brackets than their unmarried counterparts. That
penalty, however, is paid only when both spouses work. When only one spouse
works, married people are charged at a lower rate than the working spouse would
be if he or she were single. The benefit of the Homemaker IRA will go to those
who already enjoy this marriage bonus ; those who bear the marriage
penalty won't be affected.

            
And that tax bonus is not the only perk of
Partridge Familydom. Almost every tax law pertaining to marriage gives
single-income families more bang for their buck than any other category of
taxpayer. Social Security and Medicare are prime examples. Employees and
employers are each required to pay 7.65 percent of an employee's income in
Social Security taxes and 1.45 percent in Medicare taxes. (The self-employed
must contribute 15.3 percent in Social Security taxes and 2.9 percent in
Medicare taxes.) Social Security benefits are based on individuals' earnings
during their careers.

            Single
people and two-income families pay in when they are young and cash out when
they retire. However, nonworking spouses (who never paid Social Security taxes
because they didn't have an income to be taxed) are entitled to Social Security
benefits and Medicare based on the contribution of their spouses. Retired
workers collect Social Security benefits, and their nonsalaried spouses receive
half. (Working spouses must choose between their own earned benefit or half of
their spouse's.) After primary beneficiaries' deaths, their spouses collect 100
percent of the benefit earned by the deceased. The spouse also continues to
collect the full Medicare benefit. So single-income families collect 1½ times
the Social Security benefit and twice the Medicare entitlement a single person
with the same income receives.

            

               Health care is another part of the
homemaker bonus package. Most public and private employers that offer
health-care benefits to employees provide coverage to the spouses and
dependents of workers without a commensurate increase in employee
contributions. As a result, single-income families (and families with children)
typically get coverage for more people than do single people and partners in
dual-income households.

            Supporters
of the Homemaker IRA also make a feminist/fairness argument. Homemakers
don't get the IRA, they argue, because their contributions to the family and
the economy aren't counted as income. As Hutchison and Sen. Barbara Mikulski,
D-Md., wrote in a Washington 
               Times op-ed, "Failure to address the
IRA fairness issue tells homemakers: If your hard work doesn't produce taxable
revenue, it doesn't count." Because the overwhelming majority of homemakers are
women, Gloria Steinem and other feminists have long argued that their work
should be counted as part of national production.

            
But the basic premise of the IRA rules is that
people with income are taxed on their earnings. IRA accounts allow
income-earners to duck some taxation on that income if they promise to save it
until they're old. (Interest on IRA savings is not taxed until an individual
withdraws it. Furthermore, money put in IRA accounts is tax deductible when
family income is less than $40,000.)

            And while it may be unfair
that homemakers are not paid for the work they do, the upside to the deal is
that they are not taxed on it, either. Tax purists would argue that the value
of the homemakers' hard work--and the intrafamily benefits they presumably
receive in return for it--should, in fact, be treated as income and taxed, just
like the wages paid to outside service providers such as baby sitters and
housekeepers. But you won't find many in either the feminist or family-values
camps promoting that idea. As long as unpaid spouses do not pay taxes, the
whole notion of offering them tax reprieves is questionable.

            So is the
disparity between the value that Hutchison and her supporters apparently put on
at-home work done by middle- and upper-class spouses and the contributions of
women farther down the income scale. "Work is work, whether it is done inside
the home or outside the home," Hutchison argues. But you have to have money to
save it, and not many couples with young children have the luxury of tucking
away $2,000 apiece annually for their Golden Years. Moreover, tax breaks are
worth most to those whose high-bracket positions mean they need them least.

            By contrast, when it came time for Hutchison to weigh in on
the welfare debate , she supported a bill that would force single parents
on welfare to get a paid job after two years as long as their children are over
age five. Her mixed priorities when it comes to women were also revealed by the
fact that she voted "nay" on the minimum-wage bill even though it included her
own IRA proposal--and despite the fact that, according to the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, 60 percent of people working at minimum wage are women.

            Hutchison is careful to
explain she only intends to assist spouses who "choose" to stay home--not to
discourage those who work. But here's the rationale: "We are seeing, every time
we talk about crime in this country, that it does come back to poor family and
the values that some people learn at home," she says. "Anything we can do to
encourage the family unit and encourage spouses who are able to stay at home
with their children, if that is their desire, we should do it." In other words,
Hutchison is offering a reward for making the "right choice" to those who can
already afford to make it.

         
      
   
