
   
   
      
         
            Party of One

            I wish we
could sit around my kitchen table--just Bill, Bob, Hillary, Liddy, and me.
Actually, I might be pressed for time, so it would work better if we could
stand around my kitchen table while I chug half a pint of takeout
Szechwan shrimp, no MSG, before I run out to meet a friend who has also come
home late from work to gulp something before we connect for a concert and
dinner.

            But in my
spare 10 minutes, while I have all the major presidential candidates and their
significant but loving spouses gathered, I'd tackle what the first lady told
the Democratic National Convention "matters most in our lives and in our
nation--children and families." Because the Democrats were mostly
"triangulating" their children and families message to duel with the similar
message that came out of the Republican National Convention a few weeks before,
I'd tackle Sen. Dole next. Dole imagines himself a bridge "to a time of
tranquillity, faith, and confidence," so I'd ask him to what village or America
his bridge will carry folks like me--seeing as folks like me don't have
children or traditional families. "Soccer Moms" are desirable voters this
election year, but single women are off the charts--just a rung below
homosexual men who are contemplating, but denied, marriage.

            At our kitchen confab (which would probably, I'm sorry to
say, take place not around the table--since many single people live in
apartments where the kitchen is the size of a linen closet--but around the
counter), I might suggest that the first lady ask Janet Reno or Donna Shalala
if they ever feel stressed out or over-committed, even though they aren't
"packing lunches, dropping the kids off at school, and going to work." The
first lady, who detailed so eloquently the pressures faced by working mothers,
might be surprised to know that the current attorney general and the secretary
of the Department of Health and Human Services--working singles--also make
dinner, pay the bills, and feel a little tired when, on top of all their other
responsibilities, they have to take the dog to the vet.

            American
politics were a little more inclusive when campaign rhetoric revolved around
"it's the economy, stupid." Yes, Americans must feed their children, but
Americans--married and single--must feed themselves, too. But once the
Republicans and Democrats decided that the goal of all Americans must be family
and child rearing, an unpremeditated exclusionary process began.

            
At the Republican Convention, Dole urged us to
practice "right conduct" every day. Well, it's pretty hard to practice "right
conduct" when the very fabric of your personal life is judged to be
second-rate. But it's not too late to redeem single nonparents. We could change
the tax code to deter their behavior (and balance the budget) by slapping a 15
percent tax hike on every American who has not procreated and married.
(Are you listening, Mr. Dole? You could even punish the teachers' unions for
their sinful ways with a 15 percent tax hike of their own. Single nonparent
members of these unions could be slapped with a 30 percent tax hike.)

            Why are
single people are so vilified? Many of them have more time than the
married-with-children crowd to contribute to the community: I wonder how many
from each group volunteer for the Republican and Democratic campaigns, and how
the figures compare. Does Dick Morris know? Mr. Morris, architect of
triangulation as well as of the vice president's and first lady's family-values
speeches, might have consulted his companion, Miss Rowlands, during his "off"
hours at the Jefferson Hotel about whether she felt included in the Democrats'
agenda.

            It is precisely our current president's generation, the
"me-boomers" who, in unprecedented numbers, opened the doors for gay and
women's rights and, therefore, postponed or rejected traditional family values.
It seems disloyal, even a sign of self-loathing, for this president's campaign
strategy to work overtime to gain the admiration and respect of the center
while ignoring his own backyard. If Mr. Dole insists on playing footsie with
the religious right, shouldn't Mr. Clinton acknowledge his lifestyle left?

            Perhaps it's time for both
parties to consider "rectangularization"--to include in their focus groups
voters who care about health care and education but not necessarily about
getting married or having children. At the Republican Convention, Bob Dole
commended as right conduct "any screenwriter who refuses to contribute to the
mountains of trash." Well, I'm one writer who would promise Bill, Bob, Hillary,
and Liddy personally, at my kitchen table (well, kitchen counter), not to
contribute further to the trash this year. But on one condition: Both parties
must return to a genuine debate and stop bickering over who can present a
better image of wistful middle-American family life. It's irritating to be
ignored. But it's painful to be living a life which both political spectrums
deem as virtually un-American.

            It takes a citizen to make a
village. Not just a parent.

         
      
   
