
   
   
      
         
            Blood Simple

            The "Negro problem," wrote
Norman Podhoretz in 1963, would not be solved unless color itself disappeared:
"and that means not integration, it means assimilation, it means--let the
brutal word come out--miscegenation." Coming after a lengthy confession of his
tortured feelings toward blacks--and coming at a time when 19 states still had
anti-miscegenation statutes on the books--Podhoretz's call for a "wholesale
merging of the two races" seemed not just bold but desperate. Politics had
failed us, he was conceding; now we could find hope only in the unlikely
prospect of intermarriage.

            Podhoretz's famous essay
was regarded as bizarre at the time, but 33 years later, it seems like
prophecy. We are indeed intermarrying today, in unprecedented numbers. Between
1970 and 1992, the number of mixed-race marriages quadrupled. Black-white
unions now represent 12 percent of all marriages involving at least one black,
up from 2.6 percent in 1970. Twelve percent of Asian men and 25 percent of
Asian women are marrying non-Asians. Fully a quarter of married U.S.-born
Latinos in Los Angeles have non-Latino spouses. We are mixing our genes with
such abandon that the Census Bureau is now considering whether to add a new
"multiracial" category to the census in the year 2000. This orgy of
miscegenation has not yet brought the racial harmony for which Podhoretz
longed. But recent publicity about the intermarriage figures has stirred hope
once again that our racial problems might be dissolving in the gene pool.

            The
Census Bureau's "multiracial" proposal has provoked strong reactions from
civil-rights activists who fear that many African Americans will defect to the
new category, thus diluting black political power. But the debate, properly
framed, is not just about "light flight" from the black community. The debate
is about our very conception of race. For a "multiracial" box would be an
admission that the five points of our modern-day "ethno-racial pentagon"
(black, white, Asian, Hispanic, Native American) are not fixed or divinely
ordained, but fickle and all too man-made.

            Race, you see, is a fiction. As a matter of biology, it has
no basis. Genetic variations within any race far exceed the variations between
the races, and the genetic similarities among the races swamp both. The power
of race, however, derives not from its pseudoscientific markings but from its
cultural trappings. It is as an ideology that race matters, indeed
matters so much that the biologists' protestations fall away like Copernican
claims in the age of Ptolemy. So the question, as always, is whether it is
possible to break that awful circle in which myth and morphology perpetually
reinforce one another.

            The
leaders of the fledgling multiracial movement say that their category, and more
broadly, their lives, represent the way out. By marrying across the color line,
by raising mixed-race children without regard to labels, they promise to
obliterate our antiquated notions of racial difference. As a newlywed who has
recently joined their ranks, I hope they're right. When the time comes, I won't
want to infect my Chinese-Scotch-Irish-Jewish children with bloodline fever. I
won't force them to choose among ill-fitting racial uniforms. That said,
though, there are plenty of reasons to wonder whether intermarriage can ever,
as one partisan put it, "blow the lid off of race."

            Foremost is this reality: Racialism is highly adaptive.
That is, no matter how quickly demographic change proceeds, we seem to find a
way to reinvent and sustain our jerry-rigged pigmentocracy. A case in point is
the term "Hispanic." Ever since this category was added to the census in 1977,
we've been told that "Hispanic" is merely a linguistic category, that Hispanics
"can be of any race." Today, amid a boom in the Hispanic population, we hear
that caveat the same way smokers read the surgeon general's warning. The story
of the last 20 years is the way heterogenous Hispanics--who ought to have
exposed the flimsiness of racial categories--became just another homogenous
race. The square peg, by our thinking, had been rounded off.

            Will
this happen to "multiracials"? Their numbers are still small. Despite the
quadrupling of multiracial marriages since 1970, only 5 million people today
qualify--and that's counting racially distinct parents as well as their
mixed-race kids. This may not be enough of a critical mass for multiracials to
become a race of their own. Moreover, multiracials have less reason to cohere
than Hispanics ever had; they include every conceivable combination of races,
and they are not bound together by language. Still, in a nation accustomed to
thinking of "official races," they'll feel pressure to form an interest group:
multiculturalism's latest aggrieved tribe.

            One possibility is that all multiracials, over time, will
find themselves the intermediate race, a new middleman minority, less
stigmatized than "pure" blacks (however defined) but less acceptable than
"pure" whites. Their presence, like that of the "coloreds" in old South Africa,
wouldn't subvert racialism; it would reinforce it, by fleshing out the
black-white caste system. Again, however, the sheer diversity of the
multiracials might militate against this kind of stratification.

            Yet
this same diversity makes it possible that multiracials will replicate within
their ranks the "white-makes-right" mentality that prevails all around them.
Thus we might expect a hierarchy of multiracials to take hold, in which a mixed
child with white blood would be the social better of a mixed child without such
blood. In this scenario, multiracials wouldn't be a distinct group--they would
just be distributed across a continuum of color.

            Sociologist Pierre van den Berghe argues that such a
continuum is preferable to a simple black-white dichotomy. Brazilians, for
instance, with their mestizo consciousness and their many gradations of
tipo , or "type," behold with disdain our crude bifurcation of race. Yet
no amount of baloney-slicing changes the fact that in Brazil, whitening remains
the ideal. It is still better for a woman to be a branca (light skin,
hair without tight curls, thin lips, narrow nose) than a morena (tan
skin, wavy hair, thicker lips, broader nose); and better to be a morena
than a mulata (darker skin, tightly curled hair). Subverting racial
labels is not the same as subverting racism.

            Still
another possibility is that whites will do to multiracials what the Democrats
or Republicans have traditionally done to third-party movements: absorb their
most "desirable" elements and leave the rest on the fringe. It's quite
possible, as Harvard Professor Mary Waters suggests, that the ranks of the
white will simply expand to engulf the "lighter" or more "culturally white" of
the multiracials. The Asian American experience may offer a precedent: As
growing numbers of Asian Americans have entered the mainstream over the last
decade, it is increasingly said--sometimes with pride, sometimes with
scorn--that they are "becoming white."

            We could thus end up with three reconfigured races. In the
"black" box: black-black offspring. In the "mixed" box: black-Latino,
black-Asian, black-white, and Latino-Asian kids. In the "white" box:
white-white, white-Asian, and perhaps white-Latino issue. Absurd? One need only
recall the baroque lexicon of "quadroons" and "octoroons" to know the absurd
uses to which our powers of taxonomy can be put.

            These cautionary scenarios
demonstrate that our problem is not just "race" in the abstract. Our problem is
the idea of the "white race" in particular. Scholar Douglas Besharov may be
right when he calls multiracial kids "the best hope for the future of American
race relations." But even as a "multiracial" category blurs the color line, it
can reaffirm the primacy of whiteness. Whether our focus is interracial
adoption or mixed marriages or class-climbing, so long as we speak of whiteness
as a norm, no amount of census reshuffling will truly matter.

            We return, then, to the
question of politics. Perhaps we should abolish all racial classifications.
Perhaps we should supplement the five-race scheme with a "None-of-the-Above"
category. Perhaps we should replace affirmative action with a class-based
alternative. Perhaps we need a leader of mixed heritage--say, Colin Powell--to
educate the public about the realities of race. Whatever it takes, though, we
need to do more than marry one another if we are ever to rid our minds of
color-consciousness. "The way of politics," Podhoretz lamented a generation
ago, "is slow and bitter." Indeed. But it is the only lasting way. Our ideology
of "blood," like blood itself, is too fluid, too changeable, and too easily
diverted to be remade by lovers alone.

         
      
   
