
   
   
      
         
            Why Kids Have Kids

            Does welfare spawn
out-of-wedlock babies? The architects of the recently passed welfare reform
believe it does. They hope that curbing payments for additional children and
enforcing parental work requirements will reverse the 25-year trend that has
brought large numbers of unmarried mothers onto the welfare rolls.

            In 1965,
24 percent of black infants and 3.1 percent of white infants were born to
single mothers. By 1990, the rates had risen to 64 percent for black infants
and 18 percent for whites. Every year, about 1 million more children are born
into fatherless families, at an enormously increased risk of growing up in
poverty.

            Efforts by social scientists to explain the rise in
out-of-wedlock births have been unconvincing. Conservative Charles Murray, for
example, blames overly generous federal welfare benefits. But as David Ellwood
and Lawrence Summers have shown, cash welfare benefits rose sharply in the
1960s and fell in the 1970s and 1980s, when out-of-wedlock births rose
most.

            Liberals
have tended to favor the explanation offered by William Julius Wilson, who, in
a 1987 study, attributed the increase in out-of-wedlock births to a decline in
the marriageability of black men, due to a shortage of jobs. But Robert D. Mare
and Christopher Winship have estimated that at most 20 percent of the decline
in marriage rates of blacks between 1960 and 1980 can be explained by
decreasing employment.

            
Abetter theory might be called "Reproductive
Technology Shock." In the late 1960s and very early 1970s (well before Roe
vs. Wade in January 1973), the availability of both abortion and
contraception increased dramatically. Many states, including New York and
California, liberalized their abortion laws. In July 1970, the Massachusetts
law prohibiting the distribution of contraceptives to unmarried people was
declared unconstitutional. Many observers expected liberalized abortion and
contraception to lead to fewer out-of-wedlock births. But the opposite
happened, because of the decline in the custom of "shotgun weddings."

            Before
1970, the stigma of unwed motherhood was so great that most women would only
engage in sexual activity if it came with a promise of marriage in the event of
pregnancy. Men were willing to make (and keep) that promise, for they knew that
even if they left one woman, they would be unlikely to find another who would
not make the same demand. In the 1970s, women who were willing to get an
abortion, or who used contraception reliably, no longer found it necessary to
condition sexual relations on a promise of marriage in the event of pregnancy.
But women who found abortion unacceptable, or who were unreliable in their
contraceptive use, found themselves pressured to participate in premarital
sexual relations as well. These women feared, correctly, that if they refused
sexual relations, they would risk losing their partners.

            By making the birth of the child the physical choice
of the mother, the sexual revolution has made marriage and child support a
social choice of the father. And while only a few unmarried mothers once
kept their babies, only a few put them up for adoption today, because the
stigma of unwed motherhood has declined. Once shunned by their peers and
whisked out of town, pregnant teen-agers now receive both encouragement and
support to keep their babies, stay in school, and participate in other social
activities.

            Although
doubt will always remain about what causes a change in social custom, the
technology-shock theory does fit the facts. The new reproductive technology was
adopted quickly, and on a massive scale. Marital and fertility patterns changed
with similar drama, at about the same time.

            
The use of birth-control pills at first
intercourse by all unmarried women jumped from 6 percent to 15 percent in just
a few years, and probably much more among sexually active unmarried women. The
number of abortions among unmarried women grew from roughly 100,000 a year in
the late 1960s (compared with some 322,000 out-of-wedlock births) to more than
1.2 million a year (compared with 715,000 out-of-wedlock births) in the early
1980s. During the same period, births per unmarried woman roughly doubled for
whites, while the fraction of white unmarried women rose about 30 percent. For
black unmarried women, the birth rate actually fell by between 5 percent and 10
percent, but this was offset by an increase of about 40 percent in the number
of unmarried black women. Meanwhile, fertility rates for married women of both
races declined rapidly, making the out-of-wedlock birth ratio even larger.

            The
shotgun-marriage rate itself declined only gradually, but that is not
surprising. Social conventions change slowly. It took time for men to recognize
that they did not have to promise marriage in the event of a pregnancy in
exchange for sexual relations. It may also have taken time for women to
perceive the increased willingness of men to leave them if they demanded
marriage.

            One final puzzle, however, requires explanation. The black
shotgun-marriage ratio began to fall earlier than the white ratio and shows no
significant change in trend around 1970. Here, federal welfare benefits may
play a role. Because blacks, on average, have lower incomes than whites, they
are more affected by changes in welfare benefits. As a result, the rise in
welfare benefits in the 1960s may have resulted in a decline in the black
shotgun-marriage rate, and thus, in an increase in out-of-wedlock births.

            What should be done? Even if
possible, attempts to turn back the technological clock by restricting abortion
and contraception would now be counterproductive. Besides denying reproductive
freedom to women, such efforts would increase the number of children born and
reared in impoverished single-parent families. Most children born out of
wedlock are reported by their mothers to have been "wanted," but "not at that
time." Some are reported as not having been wanted at all. Easier access to
birth-control information and devices and to abortion could reduce the number
of unwanted children and improve the timing of those whose mothers would have
preferred to wait.

         
      
   
