
   
   
      
         
            A Goose-Step Guide to Dating

            "We've just been sent a memo
telling us we're not supposed to talk to the media," said the young male clerk
at Barnes & Noble when I asked if he was selling a lot of copies of The
Rules: Time Tested Secrets for Capturing the Heart of Mr. Right , the
slender, much-publicized manual of retro dating strategy for women. "But
yes"--eyeball roll, sigh, grimace--"it's flying out of here." There went my
theory that the book's sales (advertised as 800,000) reflected warehouse-size
orders from the same cabal that inflated the numbers for Ancient
Evenings , The Closing of the American Mind , A Brief History of
Time , and many other supposed huge sellers that you've never actually seen
outside a bookstore. Choosing my copy from a miniwall of identical pink
paperbacks, I figured I should probably abandon my fallback theory too, which
is that the only people who take the Rules seriously are journalists assigned
to write about them. Certainly the B & N clerk, a dating man if I ever saw
one, took them seriously. "It's all about mind games," he volunteered
scornfully. "I hate that book."

            "Mind
games" is right. The thesis of Ellen Fein and Sherrie Schneider's book is that
for women who want to marry, lunacy is the best policy. Women who take the
initiative--a broad category of behavior that includes most signs of life, not
to mention common politeness--"destroy male ambition and animal drive. Men are
born to respond to challenge. Take away challenge and their interest wanes."
So, become a Rules Girl. Having first transformed yourself (Rule 1) into
"a creature unlike any other"--radiant, confident, fashionable, mysterious,
elusive, quiet, and, if necessary, nose-jobbed--don't talk to a man first (2)
or too much (3), don't go Dutch (4) or sleep with him on the first date (14),
don't call him and rarely return his calls (5), always end phone calls (6) and
dates (11) first, and never accept a Saturday night date after Wednesday (7).
As you might expect from a book that mingles pop Darwinism with the
Weltanschauung of Cosmopolitan , the Rules can be a bit mysterious
and elusive themselves--you can't introduce yourself to your neighbor, but
taking out a personal ad is OK, and how's a girl to square the whole project of
"conditioning" the marriage-averse man with Rules 17 (Let Him Take the Lead)
and 18 (Don't Expect a Man to Change or Try to Change Him)?

            You could see The Rules as a weird fantasia on the
theme of, "Why buy the cow if you can get the milk for free?" But what sets it
apart from, say, "Dear Abby," is the demented, quasi-military precision of the
Rules. Buy a timer and set it for 10 minutes when he calls. Practice the rules
on the doorman and the butcher--let them say "hello" first to
you . If your beau fails to come across with a "romantic gift" for your
birthday and Valentine's Day, he obviously doesn't love you; so show him the
door! Don't just read the Rules--memorize them. By the end of the book, when
you're being advised to join a support group to help you resist the urge to
have a normal conversation with your boyfriend, the whole enterprise has a
distinctly cultish flavor. (Rule 31: Don't Discuss The Rules with Your
Therapist.)

            
               The
Rules isn't just about manipulating men; it's about manipulating the reader
too. The eerie assurance with which the authors insist that the Rules always
work and that any deviation brings disaster is strangely nervous-making, like
one of those chain letters that alludes darkly to people who dropped dead after
failing to pass it on. Could it possibly be that my 13-year-long marriage was
jinxed from Day One because I called my future husband first and suggested
coffee--in his neighborhood, yet, instead of my own? Actually, no. Life's much
more complicated. Sure, men like a challenge--but so do women. And nobody likes
to be challenged all the time. I know plenty of long-standing happy couples who
slept together right away, spent hours yakking on the phone, split checks down
the middle, and lived together for years before the wedding. The notion that
female initiative is useless because men know what they want is particularly
odd--most people don't even know what they want for dinner. Even odder is the
notion that what men want is a woman who's always on her way out the door.

            Since The Rules do not reflect reality, what is
their appeal--and to whom? Undoubtedly, the book owes much of its visibility to
the general mood of anti-feminism and family-values conservatism. But to see
its popularity as evidence of rejection of feminism by "women" is much too
vague. In the pages of The 
               Rules , men are a barely individualized
collection of amiable dolts, but the Rules Girl is a particular social
type--and it isn't the choosy free spirit lectured in such anti-feminist
self-help books as Smart Women, Foolish Choices . The woman depicted as
in need of the Rules is a voracious doormat, the sort of woman who sends men
Hallmark greeting cards or long letters after a single date, who rummages in
men's drawers and pockets, suggests couples therapy when brief relationships
start to crumble, throws away a new boyfriend's old clothes, cleans (and
redecorates) his apartment without asking, and refuses to see the most obvious
signs of disengagement. Her problem isn't too much liberation; it's incredibly
low self-esteem. For women like this, The Rules might seem like a way of
setting boundaries on a personality that has none, of giving a sense of purpose
and structure to a life that seems "empty" (a recurrent word), of offering
women who fear they are worthless a way of acting as if they were precious--"a
creature unlike any other"--in the hope that the pose may become reality. Of
course, this is unlikely--a motormouth cannot be "quiet and mysterious"
forever, timer or no timer, and The 
               Rules ' blithe assurance that
Mr. Right, reeled in by your "friendly, light, and breezy" persona, will accept
your edgy, insecure, and engulfing true self is, perhaps, the cruelest fantasy
in the book.

            Although the Rules Girl is anything but Everywoman,
the world depicted in the book is unfortunately the one in which millions of
single men and women live: a corporatized and highly competitive world of
office jobs and aerobics classes, personal ads, nose jobs and diets, singles
dances, self-help seminars, and spiritual fads. It's not a very warm or kind
world, or one with much room for originality or playfulness or waywardness or
even what I would call "romance." Friends matter because you need someone to
rent a beach house or go to a singles dance with. Politics and volunteer work
and books are just ways to keep busy between dates.

            The Darwinian theme prominent
in much of the discussion about dating just now reflects this world well: men
and women, different by nature and with innately opposed interests, each trying
to exploit the other first. You don't have to like the other sex--you don't
even have to like your lover. You just have to need him or her--for sex,
babies, "romantic gifts," attention, money, acceptability in a society
organized around the couple. Indeed, the subtext of The 
               Rules is
resentment toward men: As the authors put it in their inimitable fashion,
"[T]he man is the adversary (if he's someone you really like)." Why? "He has
the power to hurt you ... he runs the show."

            When feminists suggest that
men run the show--any show--they get labeled man-haters and whiners. But then,
feminists want to change the rules, not memorize them.

         
      
   
