
   
   
      
         
            The Beasts on the Bus

            Run for your life! Now the
press is actually hitting people. Even saintly C-SPAN has turned
violent.

            
               By Roger Simon
            

            
               (1477 words)
            

            Joan Egland, age 68, came
to a Bob Dole rally in Ames, Iowa, aware that politics is rough-and-tumble. But
she was unaware that it had become a contact sport, until a videocamera smacked
her in the head. "I'm sorry ," she said to the young cameraman who had
whacked her with 40 pounds of cold steel, "but that was my head you
hit!" The cameraman looked at her briefly, sneered, and then returned to his
shot. Joan Egland was a prop. Politicians' staffs assemble crowds to form the
background for TV pictures. The props are expected to applaud; they are not
expect to complain.

            Joan's husband, Stanley
Egland, 72, went up to the young man and tapped him on the shoulder.
Cameramen--officially they are known as "videographers" though some years ago
they were nicknamed "Visigoths"--hate to be touched: It jiggles the camera. The
young man whirled around, and that's when Egland gave him a shove. In Iowa,
when you smash somebody in the head with a large piece of metal, you are
expected to apologize.

            Bob Dole was oblivious to
all this, of course. Surrounded by cameras, sound men, still photographers, and
reporters, he could barely see the audience, let alone take notice of the
casualties in it. The room at the Iowa State Memorial Union was a small
one--campaigns try to get the smallest room possible to make the crowds look
bigger, and so the press horde must muscle its way through tight spaces. The
pencil press can sometimes hang around the edges, writing sardonic little
comments in their notebooks, but the TV crews must get good pictures and good
sound. That is why they exist.

            So the
major danger of the press is not, as James Fallows argues, that journalists
threaten democracy by their shallow and relentless cynicism. And the major
danger is not, as Kathleen Hall Jamieson argues, that political coverage is
"strategy saturated," "poll-driven," and "manipulated by artful consultants."
The main danger of the press corps in America today is that they can knock your
block off. The boys on the bus have become the beasts on the bus.

            The number of crews chasing the candidates around grows
larger every election cycle. At an event in Iowa this year, there were five
crews from CBS alone, including a crew for 60 Minutes , one for a special
the network was doing, one for Sunday Morning , another for the news that
night, and one for the "pool"--the take-turns-and-share system sometimes
imposed on the press in a futile attempt to cut down on this sort of
insanity.

            Multiply that by the other
major networks plus CNN and C-SPAN, add the local affiliates and independents,
and you begin to get the idea. Just a few presidential cycles ago, you would
see a crew from, say Tallahassee, Fla., or Rockford, Ill., only if a local man
was running.

            Today, TV crews from
smaller markets are in Iowa, New Hampshire, and other states as a matter of
routine. And it's not just because time on the "bird" (the communications
satellite) has gotten cheap. Such coverage is good marketing: "Your Live at
Five NewsTeam covers Election '96!" It also looks good at license-renewal time:
Your station has helped fulfill its "public service" commitment.
License-renewal applications don't discuss, though, how many citizens you have
conked in the head.

            Also,
as Tom Brokaw notes, these days "every local television station and tabloid
show and news service and whatever is all organized for what I call Big Event
television. ... It's cheaper than going out and doing hard work or breaking
original stories or investing time in doing investigative stories. They get a
truck and picture up and they look like a national news organization."

            At the Holiday Inn in West Des Moines in February, Steve
Forbes showed up for a campaign brunch with 43 camera crews. "Please move
away," Kevin McLaughlin, the Forbes chairman for Polk County, pleaded with a
press corps that insisted on standing between Forbes and the audience. The
press did not move away. It couldn't: There was no "away." Cameramen, sound
men, still photographers, and reporters clogged all available space, jostling
people as they sat and ate. "I paid good money!" a man yelled at a camera crew
planted directly between him and the candidate. The sound man turned around and
mouthed an apology but did not move.

            Four days later, at lunch
time in Nashua, N.H., at Martha's Exchange, a restaurant and brew pub, Forbes
engaged in a staple of primary campaigning: a "meet and greet" (sometimes
called a "grip and grin") with diners. It is not easy under the best of
circumstances--few diners actually want to be interrupted by politicians while
chewing--but Forbes was still being followed by an enormous press contingent.
As soon as he exited his bus, he was surrounded by camera crews and boom mikes
arching overhead like brontosauri looking for lunch.

            Forbes entered the
restaurant and walked over to the candy counter where he purchased some
homemade fudge for $3.42, handing over a $10 bill and two pennies. (Steve
Forbes carries pennies? I wrote in my notebook.) He then put a piece of fudge
in his mouth, chewed, and turned toward the cameras. Which is when they surged
forward to catch whatever gems might usher forth from his lips and when a
50-ish woman waiting for a table got hit in the head by a camera.

            "Could you please watch
out?" she asked the cameraman.

            "Shut up!" he screamed at
her.

            "What did you say?" she
said to the cameraman.

            "Shut up, shut up, shut
up!" he screamed at her. What the prop didn't understand was that she was
ruining his sound. Without thinking about it, America's TV audience has come to
expect near-perfection when it comes to sound and video. The pictures must be
in focus and steady--no bounces, no jiggles. And the sound must be
interference-free. People are listening in stereo now.

            "These
crushes do get big, but it's what we do ," says Susan Zirinsky, executive
producer for Campaign '96 at CBS News (and model for the Holly Hunter character
in Broadcast News ). "Very infrequently do you miss a major shot if
you're a network crew. It doesn't happen ." And they don't miss the sound
either. "Sound becomes so critical," Zirinsky says. "If a whole news
story is one comment, you don't want to miss it."

            And so you don't miss it. Forbes swallowed the fudge.
"Good," he said.

            Then he strode through the
press crush, knowing it would part for him. But the aisles couldn't accommodate
all the cameramen and photographers who wanted a good angle on Forbes. One
cameraman leapt up on a table as astonished diners looked up at him. Then
Forbes plunged into the kitchen. "Guys, guys, we have food here!" a waitress
wailed as one camera crew dragged its cable over a tray of cheeseburger.

            The camera and sound
people blame producers who, when the competition comes up with a picture or
soundbite you missed, don't want to hear excuses about how you didn't want to
trample some old lady.

            And not
just old ladies. The next day Forbes went to Sunapee, N.H., where his campaign
searched out the quaintest general store they could find to demonstrate how
Forbes, unlike Lamar Alexander the day before, knew the price of milk. Quaint
general stores have quaint narrow aisles, and the few people inside were
quickly run over by a metal-packing press corps. Which is where I got slammed
in the head by a cameraman. As I struggled to stay on my feet, I looked at the
side of his camera and saw a C-SPAN decal. Getting whacked in the head by
C-SPAN is like getting kneed in the groin by Mother Teresa. "Does Brian Lamb
know you're behaving this way?" I asked my assailant.

            Neither the Federal Communications Commission nor the
Federal Elections Commission keeps track of injuries to civilians by the press.
All evidence is anecdotal. But any number of "anecdotes" showed up in the press
this year. Jeff Greenfield, writing in Time on March 4, told of a Lamar
Alexander rally in Des Moines where he saw a cameraman accidentally slam a
tripod into the head of young woman, "knocking her into semi-consciousness."
The Associated Press reported that in Center Barnstead, a tiny New Hampshire
village, Pat Buchanan was unable to talk to any civilians because of all the
media around him, and that a staffer had to rescue Buchanan's nephew from an
onrushing camera crew by yelling, "Stop it! You're squashing the kid!" The
Nashua Telegraph reported on jostling within the press horde that led to
a fight in which "one cameraman was left lying in the snow."

            If the cameramen are
turning on each other, maybe there's some hope the rest of us will be
safe.

         
      
   
