
   
   
      
         
            

            
Pakistan is threatening to detonate a nuclear bomb in response to India's
nuclear tests over the past week. Pakistan says this may be necessary to
deter Indian aggression, since the major industrial nations failed to condemn
India at their weekend summit. Meanwhile the two countries are waging a war of
words. To find out who's winning, click . (And check out "International
Papers" for reactions from around the globe. "Pundit
Central" gives you the commentariat's take.) (5/18/98)
            

            
President Clinton helped China get into the business of launching U.S.
communications satellites by transferring licensing authority over these
launches from the State to the Commerce Department in 1996. The New York
Times reported that this decision overrode State's wishes and benefited,
among others, the Chinese government official who subsequently funneled large
contributions to the Democratic Party. The naive, dramatic conspiracy theory:
Clinton shifted the authority in exchange for donations from the Chinese. The
sophisticated, boring conspiracy theory: Clinton shifted the authority in
exchange for donations from the American companies involved. The most
sophisticated, most boring explanation: Democratic fund-raiser Johnny Chung
used the illusion of an influence-peddling conspiracy to skim most of the money
for himself. (5/18/98)
            

            The
Justice Department and 20 states sued Microsoft for "illegal,
anti-competitive practices." Among other things, DOJ seeks an injunction to
force Microsoft either to separate Windows 98 from Internet Explorer or to
include Netscape Navigator. The states demand that Microsoft stop bundling
additional programs with Windows. Microsoft Chairman Bill Gates says the
government is attacking innovation and endangering the U.S. economy. Each side
says it is standing up for consumers and free enterprise. (5/18/98)
            

            

               Indonesia is in chaos. Protests against the government of the world's
fourth most populous nation have provoked lethal gunfire from police. Riots and
looting have drawn tanks into the streets. More than two dozen people are dead.
The United States has told most Americans to leave. Diagnosis: Indonesians are
angry with their dictator, President Suharto, and are ready to dump him now
that his corruption and mismanagement have ruined the economy. Everyone is
waiting to see what the army will do. Editorialists argued: 1) Suharto should
step down. 2) The army should refuse to support him. 3) Indonesians should turn
to democratic institutions. Cynics observed that there is little empirical
basis for any of these hopes. (5/15/98)
            

            

               Frank Sinatra died at 82. Key stats: 2,000 songs, 240 albums, one Oscar,
one Medal of Freedom. Obits called him the pop singer of the century, noting
his range, durability, and influence through Big Band, blues, and rock 'n'
roll. Oldsters reminded Gen Xers that Sinatra drew screaming crowds and
swooning girls before Elvis Presley and the Beatles did. The unauthorized spin:
hot-tempered serial husband and Mafia pal. The authorized spin: blue-collar
hero. (David Plotz's October 1997 
                  Slate
                "Assessment" of
Ol' Blue Eyes includes audio clips.) (5/15/98)
            

            

               
                  Seinfeld signed off. The buildup: weeks of media hype by the
"Seinfeld industrial complex." Plot summary of the final episode: Jerry,
Elaine, George, and Kramer went to jail for failing to aid a carjacking victim
in a small town. Dozens of peripheral characters mocked by the main characters
in previous episodes returned to testify against them. The spins, in order of
ascending cynicism: 1) This teaches us that the current vices exemplified by
the main characters (selfishness, narcissism, and greed) will be punished. 2)
This is the last time all Americans will share a communal TV experience--sniff,
sniff--before the cable/Internet revolution permanently disperses us. 3) This
is the last time a network will be able to stuff a sitcom with $32 million
worth of interminable commercials. 4) The main characters will get out of jail
and launch new shows to rake in new jackpots. 5) New York Times
headline: "Sitcom Falls, World Survives." Chicago Tribune editorial:
"Yada Yada, Get a Life." (5/15/98)
            

            
Attorney General Janet Reno requested an independent counsel to check out
influence-peddling and illegal fund-raising allegations against Labor
Secretary Alexis Herman . The Washington Post said Reno's decision
proves she is not covering up for President Clinton. The New York Times
said the decision suggests that she is covering up for Clinton by not seeking
an independent counsel against him but going after Herman even though the
evidence against her is relatively weak. (5/13/98)
            

            The

                  New Republic fired writer Stephen Glass for inventing stories in
his articles and fabricating notes to fool TNR 's fact checkers. Editors
at other magazines for whom Glass wrote are reviewing his published articles to
gauge the extent of his deception. The spins: 1) He fooled everyone. 2) He
fooled everyone except me. 3) It's his editor's fault, for not caring about
accuracy. 4) It's attitude journalism's fault. 5) It's the cult of youth's
fault. 6) It's his parents' fault. 7) The poor guy, he was under too much
pressure. 8) Stop pitying him, he put himself under the pressure. 9) You just
can't trust anyone anymore. 10) If you reward writers who con their subjects,
don't be surprised when they con you. (For 
                  Slate
               's take, see
"Glass
Houses," by Jack Shafer.) (5/13/98)
            

            The Danish woman
who was arrested in New York last year for leaving her baby in a stroller
outside a restaurant has sued the city for $20 million. She says she was
falsely arrested, maliciously prosecuted, and unconstitutionally deprived of
custody of her baby. Reporters noted with irony that the woman, having been
admonished to embrace American customs, has done so by filing a huge lawsuit.
New York City officials compounded the irony by accusing her of gall.
(5/13/98)
            

         
      
   
