
   
   
      
         
            

            Real
Quiet lost the Belmont Stakes to Victory Gallop by a nose. This is the
second straight year that the winner of the Kentucky Derby and the Preakness
fell just short in the final leg of the Triple Crown. (Last year's near-winner
was Silver Charm.) The last Triple Crown winner was Affirmed, 20 years ago. The
popular spin: How sad for Real Quiet's jockey, Kent Desormeaux, and for trainer
Bob Baffert, who also trained Silver Charm. The backstage spins: 1) How sweet
for jockey Gary Stevens, who rode Victory Gallop this year after having lost on
board Silver Charm last year. 2) Desormeaux and Baffert are lucky they lost the
race outright, because if they'd won, Real Quiet would have been disqualified
for interfering with Victory Gallop's run--and they'd be remembered for
scandal, not just defeat. (6/8/98)
            

            The
National Rifle Association held its annual convention and showcased its new
president, Charlton Heston. Click for a dissection of the NRA's spin on
school shootings. 
               (6/8/98)
            

            

               Terry Nichols was sentenced to life in prison for his part in the
Oklahoma City bombing. The dramatic spin: The families of the victims testified
about their grief and received justice. The intellectual spin: Judge Richard
Matsch sent a message against terrorism and in support of the government.
Matsch argued that the workers who were killed had been establishing justice,
ensuring domestic tranquility, and promoting the general welfare. His sound
bite: "This was not a murder case. ... It is a crime against the Constitution."
(6/5/98)
            

            The
House fell 61 votes short of the two-thirds majority needed to pass a
constitutional amendment to allow organized prayer in schools , religious
displays in federal buildings, and the spending of tax money for religiously
affiliated groups. The vote was 224-203 in favor. Supporters argued that
Congress should protect religious students from anti-religious school
administrators. Opponents argued that religious-minority students and school
administrators should be protected from Congress. The naive spin: Republicans
lost. The sophisticated spin: Republicans won, by appeasing Christian
conservatives who will reward them at the polls in November.
(6/5/98)
            

            The
Supreme Court rejected independent counsel Ken Starr's request to
resolve whether Clinton aide Bruce Lindsey and Secret Service employees must
answer questions in the Monica Lewinsky investigation. Instead, these questions
will proceed to the U.S. Court of Appeals. For a look at how Starr is
recovering ground in his PR battle with President Clinton, click .

               (6/4/98)
            

            

               Monica Lewinsky dumped William Ginsburg and hired Jacob Stein and Plato
Cacheris as her new lawyers. Theories on why she did it: 1) Unlike Ginsburg,
Stein and Cacheris know how to defend high-profile Washington clients. 2)
Unlike Ginsburg, they know how to shut up--and proved it by saying nothing when
Lewinsky presented them to the press. Ginsburg, meanwhile, went on CNN to deny
he had been fired. 3) Unlike Ginsburg, they're willing to make nice with
Kenneth Starr in order to avert an indictment of Lewinsky. Pundits hope the
parties will cut a deal to get Lewinsky to testify against Clinton.
(6/3/98)
            

            Several
states held referendums and primary elections June 2. The headlines: 1)
Californians approved a ballot measure to replace bilingual education with one
year of training in English. Hispanic politicians opposed the measure, but
voters supported it across ethnic lines. Pundits think other states will follow
suit. 2) Californians rejected a measure that would have banned unions from
spending dues on political contributions without their members' consent.
Pundits think this will hurt similar initiatives in other states. 3) California
Lt. Gov. Gray Davis beat Rep. Jane Harman and businessman Al Checchi, who spent
millions of their personal wealth, for the Democratic gubernatorial nomination.
Pundits hailed this as a triumph of political experience over wealth and
negative ads. 4) Alabama Gov. Fob James Jr. fell just shy of the 50 percent
needed to avoid a runoff in the Republican primary for governor. The national
media clucked at James' embarrassment and blamed it on his putative religious
extremism. (6/3/98)
            

            

               Russia's economy is in peril. Its stock market has lost more than half
its value this year, including a 10 percent drop Monday before rallying
Tuesday. Analysts fear the economic ills could spread to Europe and that
Russians might resort to selling nuclear technology under the table. To stave
off disastrous currency devaluation, the Russian government is tripling
interest rates, spending reserves, and exhorting Russian tycoons to invest
their money in Russian markets to restore foreign investors' confidence. The
U.S. government faces two dilemmas: 1) It must make the situation look grim
enough to jar Congress into supporting the International Monetary Fund but not
so grim that investors pull all their money out of Russia. 2) It must bail out
Russia soon enough to avert collapse but not before Russia delivers the
politically painful tax, spending, and legal reforms necessary for its
long-term health. (6/3/98)
            

            The National Gay and
Lesbian Task Force released a report on public attitudes toward
homosexuality . The New York Times agreed the findings show
increasing public tolerance for gays despite persistent moral disapproval.
For analysis of the report and its spin, click . 
               (6/3/98)
            

         
      
   
