
   
   
      
         
            Chattermailbox: FDR and Rock 'n' Roll

            Walter S. Mossberg, who writes the "Personal Technology" column for the Wall Street Journal ,
but whose true expertise lies in the field of music (when Chatterbox worked at
the Journal 's Washington bureau, he was the only person there who knew
all the words to Woody Guthrie's "Union Maid"), takes exception to 
this column's assertion that baby boomers were not the first large
mainstream audience to embrace rock 'n' roll (which previously, of course, had
been embraced by blacks). In an e-mail, Mossberg writes:

            

               
                  I agree that it's absurd to make some sharp delineation between
generations in the late 1950s and early '60s. Clearly there were boomers who
didn't get rock music, and some members of the prior generation of teens who
did get it. Early rock co-existed with pallid pop music. Nothing was as
clear-cut about those days as it seems from today's perspective.
               

               But let me tell you why I think you may have been too dismissive when you
wrote, "Were the consumers who turned 'Rock Around the Clock' and 'Heartbreak
Hotel' into hit records 9 and 10 years old? Of course they weren't. They were
teen-agers who'd been born during and shortly before World War II."

               As a second-year boomer (March 1947, about six months younger than Clinton),
I can testify that between the ages of 9 and 13 we were very musically adept in
my whitebread, spanking new suburban neighborhood in R.I. And we had
allowances, and we bought rock records. It was during those years in the late
'50s, in fact, and not the '60s, that many of us older boomers were first
turned on to rock, began following the artists, and--defying parental
wishes--began listening clandestinely to the handful of DJs who played rock 'n'
roll. And, believe me, if a city had one such DJ, that was a lot.

               It was during the fifth, sixth, and seventh grades for me--not high
school--that I began to buy 45s and listen to people like Elvis, Little
Richard, and Duane Eddy. Now, we didn't go to any Bill Haley concerts, and
older teens, with more money and freedom, probably did play a big role in all
of that. But there were significant differences between most people in these
two generations.

               Unlike our predecessors, I knew of nobody in my group in the late '50s who
had ever listened to, or liked, people like Frank Sinatra or Perry Como. That
was our parents' music, we thought. The prior generation of teens thought folk
music was the clean-cut Kingston Trio ; by the early '60s, we were into Peter, Paul and
Mary, and through them, Dylan. (When I marched on the Pentagon, PP&M were
singing away on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial.) They tended to like Pat
Boone's covers of Little Richard. We liked the real thing.
               

               Remember that most early rock 'n' roll artists, including Haley
and--shockingly--Elvis, had repertoires that included lots of swing-type music,
or syrupy ballads or "pop" tunes, which made them transitional artists able to
appeal to both generations. Early rock was crossover music that allowed the
older teens to support it, until the transition stopped and it got too loud and
unruly for many of them. By then, it was the '60s, and we boomers were the
teens. So it all worked out.

               A terrific account of all of this (though not of the demographics per se) is
in the new book Flowers in the Dustbin
                  , by James Miller. He does
a great job chronicling the early proto-rock, among other things.
               

            

            Chatterbox is intrigued, but not surprised, to learn that his friend
Mossberg was a-rockin' and a-rollin' from the age of 9. Indeed, Chatterbox
finds it impossible to picture the 9-year-old Mossberg as anything other than a
precocious know-it-all. The question is, how many other
9-year-olds--exempting the other kids in Mossberg's whitebread suburban
neighborhood, who no doubt fell under his influence--were buying rock 'n' roll
records? Surely not many. But Chatterbox concedes he may be wrong about this,
and invites others in Mossberg's age cohort (52, 53) to submit testimonials on
this question to the Fray (to do so, click below).

         
      
   
