
   
   
      
         
            Passing on the Left
            

            Dear Tamar,

            Bill Bradley was known as "Dollar Bill" when he played professional
basketball--not because of how he played but because he squeezed his dollars
until they wept and cried. While his teammate Walt Frazier ran around in mink
coats and Rolls Royces, Dollar Bill wore the same ratty trench coat and shoes
run down at the heels. Just something I thought you'd like to know. We are back
again at tactics. The Bradley inside crew has looked at what seems like a lock
by Al Gore and decided to run to Gore's left. The Gorites have seen this and
are protecting that flank--but not too flagrantly. They showed this recently
with the Gore proposal to achieve health insurance for more of America's
children. Not all "tactics" are evil. This a worthy goal, one that will save us
all those emergency-room dollars--but it is part of a political maneuver as
well. Bradley has rightly sensed discontent among traditional Dems about
Clinton's me-tooism with respect to Republican philosophy. The problem is that
the discontent was eclipsed by public anger about the impeachment drama.

            The brilliance of the conservative movement (take a bow, you crafty
Kristols) lies principally in how it changed the language of American
politics. "Liberal" became a pejorative, synonymous with weakness, taxation,
overspending--and blind obeisance to welfare cheats and Negroes. Liberals were
nonplused and bit their nails as the conservative ideology machine turned them
into pulp. That machine would still be dominating the debate--had it not been
for Newt and the radicals who overplayed the mandate and made the American
people edgy. Dollar Bill, Rhodes Scholar that he is, is smart enough to know
all this and is betting that there will be some daylight to the left of Gore.
George W. is in the same ball park. He saw that frothing Republican convention
in '92 that spelled disaster for his party. He will not be out-compassioned and
will utter sweet nothings even as he pulls the switch on the electric chair.
Both Dollar Bill and George W. recognize that Americans are a people of the
middle . But as for Dollar Bill, he's caught in the passing lane behind the
Gore express. As that girl group used to say in the famous doo-wop song:
It's gonna take a miracle, yes, it's gonna take a miracle."
            

            Speaking of loaded terminology. The big conservative coup was transforming
the phrase "affirmative action" into "preferences"--as you do in your
posting--such that newspapers use the two interchangeably. I refer you to the
Chicago Tribune columnist Clarence Page--just about the only prime-time
journalist in the country to really jump on this, this ... linguistic
hijacking. The two terms are not interchangeable. "Affirmative action"
connotes reaching out to underrepresented minorities on the grounds that some
racial mixture is socially desirable. When I go out to find and hire people I
do not "prefer" someone nonwhite. But I do in fact "prefer" to have a staff
that reflects something of the population that my business is meant to
serve--lest my company falter and die. Hence, the New York City cops searching
for gay police officers. Wise move, in this capital of Wigstock, that Labor Day
drag ball.

            On the question of how we salvage inner-city schools. We as a people must be
willing to ensure at the minimum that the kids have a qualified teacher at the
front of the room, a set of books, and a safe school. When the schools are
particularly bad--as in the case of Washington, D.C., I have advocated
vouchers, not penny ante ones proposed by some in Congress last year but real
ones that would send at least a few kids out of the city to the very best
schools available. We can't do anything about bad parents--be they white bad
parents or black bad parents--and simply must treat that issue as such. If it
takes federal subsidies or a Peace Corps strategy, so be it. The ACLU suit in
California may be slow going, but it has highlighted the principle problem. As
a culture, we have tended to believe that good education is wasted on the black
and brown poor--who will soon be the majority. And as Ward Connerly said the
other day, that sets up a self-fulfilling prophecy that is killing the
kids--and America's future in the bargain. We can either throw up our hands--or
send in the troops. It's that simple, I think.

         
      
   
