
   
   
      
         
            Weekend Cocktail Chatter
            

            Well, if people were expecting the end of summer to bring a return to
high-volume trading and sharp price swings on Wall Street, they were certainly
disappointed. The languor of the late summer carried over into this week, as
the stock market meandered aimlessly (is there any way to meander aimfully?).
The Dow is now just about where it was in early May. Interest rates are higher,
but inflation looks just as dead, and corporate earnings are booming, and when
you mix all that together, what you end up with is a market that looks to be
about where it should be.

            Of course, this could all change tomorrow.

            There was only one story this week--Viacom and CBS--and unfortunately it was
a story that got written four or five hundred times without anything really
changing. So now we all get to look at NBC and wonder how long it'll be before
it snaps up or is snapped up by a movie studio or something. It's almost like
the 1980s, but thanks to 
Mel Karmazin it's not. So on to the Cocktail Chatter.

            1. "Today was the day when the dreaded 9/9/99 bug was supposed to
strike and mess up computers everywhere. But the bug was a nonstarter .
There were no &$%@#($$$@#(( … Mayday! Mayday!"

            2. "The International Monetary Fund had planned to sell $2.5 billion of
its gold stash to finance debt relief for poor countries, but has given up
on that plan because the gold industry was worried that the sale would force
down prices . It must be great to have a vault full of a useless metal
that's valuable only because other people think it's valuable and then find out
that other people think it's so valuable that if you sell it, the value will
disappear."

            3. "Sun Microsystems introduced its 'revolutionary enterprise desktop
appliance,' the Sun Ray 1, with a print ad featuring 27 lines and more than
300 words of copy . Whatever happened to: 'Coke--It's the Real Thing'?"

            4. "Buddhadey Bhattacharya , home minister for West Bengal, told the
New York Times : 'We discuss the great questions: What is
postmodernism ? What does Noam Chomsky have to say about this or that? Was
Green Acres a televisual enactment of William Jennings Bryan's 'Cross of
Gold' speech?'"

            4a. "OK, joke's over. Bhattacharya didn't really say that 'What is
postmodernism?' was a great question."

            5. "Britain's central bank raised its securities repurchase rate by
25 basis points yesterday, essentially taking back a rate cut it had
pushed through in June. Markets everywhere shrugged."

            6. "Among the competitive concerns raised by analysts of the Viacom-CBS
deal was the possibility that when Runaway Bride , which was produced
by Paramount, is sold to television, CBS will have the inside track .
Apparently, concerns about just this kind of situation spurred Congress to pass
the Sherman Antitrust Act back in the 1890s. Who knew anyone could have
that much foresight?"

            7. "Warren Jenson, chief financial officer for Delta Air Lines, is leaving
his job to become CFO of Amazon.com . Among other things, Jenson would
like to work on making Amazon's stock price 'more stable.' It's lovely
to dream big dreams, isn't it?"

         
      
   
