
   
   
      
         
            The Return of the L-Word?
            

            Dear Brent,

            Well, I know Bradley's formal announcement is hardly news--he's been running
for president for years now, hasn't he?--but I was struck by the stories this
morning. Never mind the "aw shucks" stuff: We expected that. Also the now de
rigueur claims that he'll restore the dignity of the Oval Office, won't be
driven by polls, etc., etc. What interested me was his unabashed,
old-fashioned, capital-L-liberal pitch. He's really running on the idea of
helping poor people--"strengthening the weak" and "challenging the strong" and
spreading the new stock-market prosperity to the least among us.

            I'm not complaining: more power to him if he can pull it off. But it sort of
amazes me that he thinks it will work in late 1990s America. Just a few years
ago, the very word "liberal" was taboo. And the ever astute Clinton would no
more claim to be a liberal than he would try a tell a story about himself
without spin: Remember all that stuff about "triangulating" and the Democrats
as the party of the suburban middle class? I didn't think I'd see another
declared liberal Democrat in my lifetime (outside of New York City, of course).
And what I really wonder is: Could Bradley be on to something--politically?

            Is the me-too generation finally growing up and looking beyond itself? Is
the comfortable middle class so comfortable now that people feel they can
afford to be liberal again? Arthur Schlesinger Jr. always told us this would
happen: that American politics run in cycles of conservative constraint and
liberal largesse--and, I suppose, in his own way, Bush too has signaled that he
sees a new mood dawning. With "compassionate conservatism," he, too, is banking
on a sense that the public wants to think of itself as generous again now:
generous, caring, altruistic and--yes, let's face it--liberal. The question
remains, of course, how ? What can we as a nation really do to help the
poor and the left out? And Bush's ostensibly conservative ideas could turn out
to be more effectively liberal than Bradley's more conventionally
liberal ones. But I must say, I'm struck by the shift in rhetoric--and what it
says about both men's readings of the national mood.

            Which brings us back to where we were yesterday: Are there other means of
achieving equal opportunity than with preferences? It sounds as if you and I
agree completely on that: The answer is education and what I call
"development." Narrow the gap in black-white school achievement and you won't
need to put your thumb on the scale of college admissions or hiring or
promotions or anything else. (And yes, I agree, Ward Connerly took a principled
stand for just that long-term solution when he endorsed the ACLU suit pressing
for better schools in poor areas of California.) But the question here, too, it
seems to me, is precisely how do you do it. How do we make the schools really
work for poor kids? What do we do about the parenting that doesn't prepare them
for school? How do we counteract the peer pressure that tells them not to
bother in class because it's "acting white"? And who exactly should be doing
all this--the government or the charitable private sector, or some combination
of the two?

            I'm sorry if I sound like a broken record, but I always come back to the
same question: the means. I'm thrilled that the public may be feeling more
compassionate now. But that's only the beginning of the conversation, not the
end of it. The devil--and answer--is in the details. We may all be liberals
again now, but what exactly are we going to do about it?

            All best,
Tamar

         
      
   
