
   
   
      
         
            Take the Money and Run
            

            The top issues are Bill Clinton's grant of clemency for imprisoned Puerto
Rican nationalists and Bill Bradley's official announcement of his presidential
candidacy. The death of the GOP's tax cut and Pat Buchanan's likely defection
to the Reform Party also get discussed.

            The commentariat is nearly unanimous in its condemnation of Clinton's
clemency for Puerto Ricans associated with a terrorist group. One of the
released prisoners, Ricardo Jimenez, appears on NBC's Meet the
Press . He does not make a good impression. He rocks back and forth,
swivels in his chair, stutters, and shows little, if any, remorse for FALN
bombings--though he does renounce violence. (See quotations from the interview
below.) Later in the program, James Carville spars with wife Mary Matalin over
the clemency issue. Carville--who, as usual, looks like a lizard on
amphetamines--notes that Jimmy Carter and many religious leaders, including
Bishop Desmond Tutu, support the clemency. But on PBS's NewsHour With Jim
Lehrer , Mark Shields scoffs at this defense. For a while, he says, 
the president wouldn't even take Carter's phone calls, so it's absurd to think
Clinton now takes his advice on domestic policy. And on CNN's Capital Gang , Robert Novak speaks for many when he asks, "Can
you explain to me how a president who wants you to go to jail if you don't have
a trigger lock is going to say that these [prisoners] should be released, even
though they were collecting arms?" As for Hillary's belated disagreement with
her husband over the clemency, even her defenders--such as Capital
Gang's Al Hunt--note that the move has only confirmed the stereotype of
Hillary as tin-eared and imperious.

            Most pundits are impressed with Bill Bradley's speech announcing his
candidacy, as well as his rising polls. NewsHour's Mark Shields says
that Bradley aides are actually worried about peaking too soon. Many
opinion-makers think Al Gore's campaign is "getting into desperate trouble"
(Robert Novak, Capital Gang ), and George Stephanopoulos (ABC's
This Week ) thinks Gore might lose the AFL-CIO's
endorsement if Clinton brings China into the World Trade Organization. But
despite all this, several pundits note that Gore is still the candidate to
beat. Al Hunt ( Capital Gang ) predicts that Bradley will have to win
both Iowa and New Hampshire to have a chance at the nomination, and Steve
Roberts (CNN's Late
Edition ) warns that Bradley could veer too far left to remain
electable.

            The pundits, like the GOP, concede that tax cuts is a no-win issue this
year. Several panelists--including George F. Will ( This Week ) and
Michael Barone ( Late Edition )--think the GOP will make taxes a
campaign issue in 2000. Karen Tumulty ( Late Edition ) and Sam Donaldson
( This Week ) note the oddity of Republicans wanting to spend the
surplus and Democrats wanting to pay down the debt.

            On Meet the Press Pat Buchanan all but announces his defection to
the Reform Party. "I'm leaning in that direction now--strongly," he says. "I
genuinely believe I could win the presidency of the United States. I think the
road through the [GOP] primaries ... [it's] almost closed and rigged. But the
door is really wide open [with the Reform Party]." Buchanan promises not to
renounce his pro-life views, but stresses that abortion is the only issue on
which he and the Reform Party disagree. On This Week , George
Stephanopoulos notes that America's apparent involvement in East Timor will
only serve to further alienate the isolationist Buchanan from the Republican
mainstream. Tim Russert ( Meet the Press ) flashes a poll indicating
that Buchanan would consume nearly all of George W. Bush's lead over Gore in a
three-way race.

            
               Broder's Buchanan Bludgeoning Grilling Pat Buchanan on
Meet the Press , David Broder spends most of the interview imputing
that Buchanan's views on foreign policy are anti-Semitic. As evidence, he trots
out a quote from Buchanan's new book (buy it here ) arguing that American foreign policy is hostage to
ethnic lobby groups, and that the Israeli lobby is the most powerful. Now,
Buchanan may in fact be anti-Semitic--many liberals and Jewish neo-cons think
so--but a pundit as grizzled as Broder should know better than to make such a
serious accusation without serious evidence.

            
               Repent? No. Renounce? Yes.
On Meet the Press , Tim Russert asks released Puerto Rican prisoner
Ricardo Jimenez, "If you in fact are part of an organ, in support of an organ,
that sets off 130 bombs, isn't there a pretty strong possibility that innocent
people are going to be hurt and killed?"

            "No, no."

            "One hundred thirty bombs--taverns, restaurants, places where civilians
frequent?"

            "No, no. If, if, if, precautions--I think all precautions were taken, you
know, to make sure all human life was preserved."

             Later, Jimenez says: "I definitely will not be using any violence
whatsoever, or acts of violence, to further any goals of the independence
[movement] of Puerto Rico."

         
      
   
