
   
   
      
         
            Life as Moebius Strip
            

            Dear Nora:

            I didn't watch the Open, if by "Open" you mean this big tennis thing in
Queens; I don't watch sports, except the very occasional Knicks playoff or
World Series Games 4, 5, 6, or 7.

            I did watch some of the Emmys, although not as much of it as my youngest
daughter, Lucy, who at 9 is as deeply and weirdly interested in celebrotainment
(e.g., Emmy Awards shows, the Oscars, Entertainment Weekly ) as I was at
her age. I got over it, more or less, so trust that she will, too. The
conventional wisdom is correct: The Sopranos deserved to win pretty much
every award, and the fact that it got only two is a travesty, to the degree
that Emmy injustice can be a travesty. Since you are a housemate of the world's
great Mafia chronicler, I've wondered what you think of the show.

            Also, Emmys-wise: I adore Jenna Elfman. Why do most of the Hollywood-actor
Scientologists seem so appealing? Maybe we should convert.

            The fundamental problem with the Emmys qua Emmys (aside from the fact, as I
learned from the Times this morning, that the voters are volunteers,
disproportionately elderly, and unemployed) is that most shows on television
are series--and so the same shows and writers and
actors-playing-the-same-characters get Emmys year after year. This makes for
bad ritual. Of course, this is also the problem with the National Magazine
Awards lunch, which has the additional problem of being, along with the White
House Correspondents Dinner, the most depressingly Soviet-like assembly I have
ever attended.

            Do you find the ongoing anti-mosquito spraying of New York City with
malathion, neighborhood by neighborhood, from trucks and from the air, as
charmingly quaint as I do? It seems like something Fiorello La Guardia would
have ordered done, and Weegee documented.

            Speaking of charmingly quaint, and speaking of (literally) Soviet things,
how about Melita Norwood, the 87-year-old KGB asset in England? "I would do the
same thing again," she said, as people outside her house shouted "Traitor!
Traitor!" And triply quaint--unapologetic pro-Soviet communism, little old
English lady with a coffee-filter first name photographed smelling her flowers,
righteous anti-granny indignation about Cold War politics. And everyone
concerned, on both sides, acting more or less honorably ... so unlike, say, the
Bill and Monica thing, where everyone concerned, on both sides, acted more or
less dishonorably. (The same new book that exposes Melita, The Mitrokhin
Archive , says that the KGB manufactured a forged letter from Oswald to
Howard Hunt at the CIA before November 22, and leaked it to American conspiracy
theorists in the '70s. Although I'm sure the conspiracists would tell me that
this new story is just new CIA disinformation.)

            James Salter in the Times on the decline of civilization and the rise
of pop culture: Fine, I wish people read books more, too, but didn't it read
like a parody of a windy, pretentious old fogey? "When I wrote movies ...
thinking of Graham Greene and John Steinbeck, who were writers as well as film
writers ..."

            And finally, just to nip at the hand that's feeding us, the day's Microsoft
antitrust trial story: How perfectly, postmodernistically apt that e-mails sent
by Microsoft executives to other Microsoft executives during the trial (back on
November 22, in fact) are now being introduced into evidence at the same trial.
One more way in which life has become a Moebius strip.

            Over to you.
Kurt

         
      
   
