
   
   
      
         
            Good Sports

            Although international affairs lead all papers, above-the-fold photos of
Serena Williams celebrating her U.S. Open victory dominate the front pages. The
New York Times leads with
the restarting of negotiations over China's entry into the World Trade
Organization; the other papers refer the story. The Los Angeles
Times leads with an exclusive: In an interview a Yugoslav general
threatened to reenter Kosovo by force if the United Nations does not allow Serb
soldiers back into the province. The Washington Post leads with Indonesia's softening stance on
allowing peacekeepers into violence-torn East Timor; the other papers also
front the story.

            The chief of Indonesia's armed forces, Gen. Wiranto, expressed willingness
to accept an "accelerated deployment" of peacekeeping troops. Hours later
Wiranto reframed his message by saying that he would consider "security
cooperation." Indonesia's U.N. ambassador asserted that it was not time for
peacekeepers. President Clinton suggested that the U.S. military might offer
logistical support for an Australian-led peace force. The Post reports
that a 10-member U.S. military team arrived in Australia to help plan for an
East Timor operation.

            The NYT boldly heads its story "Jakarta Concedes A Loss of Control,"
but the LAT makes clear that no coherent message is emanating from
Jakarta. The paper underscores that Gen. Wiranto made his comments in informal
talks with a U.N. delegation he was escorting around East Timor. The general
acknowledged that some of his troops might be allying themselves with violent
anti-independence militia groups.

            The LAT and NYT report that during the high-ranking U.N.
delegation's visit to East Timor no shots were heard, but the officials could
see that the city was in ruins. In the East Timorese U.N. compound, civilians
cowered in fear of the next paramilitary onslaught. The Post reviews
evidence of atrocities tied to the Indonesian military. A human rights group
reported that hundreds of East Timorese have been shot or hacked to death,
including: U.N. employees, members of the Red Cross, priests, and infants.

            Presidents Clinton and Jiang Zemin instructed their negotiators to resume
talks on China's entry into the WTO. Negotiations soured last April when
Clinton rejected a promising deal. Espionage allegations and the bombing of
China's Belgrade embassy further stalled relations. The NYT assesses the
meeting as a significant sign that the rift between China and the U.S. is
healing. The Post fronts a photo of Jiang and Clinton sharing a
good-natured laugh, but its inside account emphasizes that the leaders made "no
tangible progress." The paper cautions that it remains unclear whether China
will recommit to cutting its tariffs to 10 percent and phasing out import
restrictions in exchange for WTO membership.

            The Yugoslav army claims it might invade Kosovo because the U.N. has failed
to protect non-Albanian civilians. The LAT reports that Serb
paramilitaries may already be infiltrating Kosovo through the French-protected
sector of the province. A senior French commander acknowledged that
peacekeeping officials suspect Serbian paramilitaries are permeating northern
Kosovo and stirring up unrest.

            A political brief in the NYT reports that during a recent trip to
Boston Al Gore announced a $5 million aid package for New England's fishing
industry, even though the program was approved a year ago. The piece is
ostensibly based on a Boston Globe story. On Friday the Republican
National Committee sent news organizations two press releases highlighting the
Globe story. The releases are the latest in a series of "World According
to Gore" faxes that cast the vice-president as a political opportunist. The
NYT brief cited one condemnatory quote from the Globe story, the
same quote that the RNC underlined and boldfaced in its attack fax.

            All papers note that Serena Williams is the first African-American to take
the women's U.S. Open title in more than 40 years. After Martina Hingis beat
Serena's sibling in the semi-finals, seventeen-year-old Serena defeated Hingis
in straight sets. Serena's father had predicted an all-Williams final. The
NYT notes that his comment provoked Martina to call Mr. Williams a "big
mouth." Serena volleyed by attributing Hingis' remark to her "lack of formal
education."

         
      
   
