
   
   
      
         
            The Indo 180?

            The Washington Post and New York Times lead with Indonesia's concession that an
international peacekeeping force might be necessary to control the violence
raging in East Timor. The Los Angeles Times leads with a pact signed by Gov. Gray Davis
and 57 Indian leaders which would allow an expansion of gambling operations on
California reservations; the top non-local story at the LAT is the
agreement between the U.S. and Russia to co-staff a Colorado command center
that would monitor "missile early-warning data," in case the Y2K computer bug
causes missile "mishaps" (read "launches").

            Both the WP and the NYT report that Indonesian armed forces
chief Gen. Wiranto has bowed to international pressure to consider accepting
foreign troops in East Timor. The NYT reports that it's not clear what
changed Wiranto's mind but offers as likely possibilities the presence of a
U.N. delegation sent to sway the government and Kofi Annan's warning that
continued violence could lead to charges of crimes against humanity. The
WP , on the other hand, is skeptical that Wiranto has changed his mind,
reporting he said that outside peacekeepers would not be welcome before the
army could "calm down the situation" (no word on when or if), and that
widespread anger at the U.N. "will be shown and aimed at the incoming
international peacekeeping forces," should they arrive prematurely. The
WP goes on to list the Indonesian government's "varying explanations"
for the violence, including charges that the foreign press was "exaggerating
the problem" and, Wiranto's own suggestion, that the violence is the U.N.'s
fault for playing a role in the independence elections in the first place.

            Both papers report that in addition to the routing of the general
population, the systematic killing of Roman Catholic clergymen in East Timor,
who were seen to have supported independence for the country, continues. The
WP fronts a nun's first-hand account of a massacre of Catholic priests,
one of the first of such graphic reports to emerge from East Timor.

            The LAT lead describes the deal granting Indians exclusive rights to
operate "Nevada-style" casinos, a story the NYT fronts. Lawmakers
approved a constitutional amendment that would facilitate the deal. California
voters are predicted to approve the amendment in March. The LAT quotes
Gov. Davis as saying, "For too long California's Indians have been denied the
respect and dignity they deserve. That sad chapter in our history ends today."
Problem solved?

            The LAT and the NYT front a ruling by a North Carolina judge
that declares the Charlotte-Mecklenburg district officially desegregated,
thereby ending the thirty-year old busing program designed to reduce
segregation. The ruling represents the end of an era, and will have countrywide
ramifications. According to the LAT , the 115-page ruling outlaws
"assigning children to schools or allocating educational opportunities and
benefits through race-based lotteries, preferences, set-asides or other means
that deny students an equal footing based on race." Both papers point out that
Charlotte-Mecklenburg joins the growing list of desegregated districts,
including districts in Oklahoma City, Cleveland, and Denver. According to the
LAT , which provides the better overview, the Justice Department is
considering desegregation orders in some 500 districts. The NYT notes
that the judge, described as a former campaign worker for Jesse Helms and
appointed to the bench by Reagan at Helms' behest, collected signatures on a
petition against busing back in 1969, the year the Supreme Court ordered
Charlotte to desegregate (fifteen years after Brown vs. the Board of
Education ).

            A NYT front story reports that 11 Puerto Rican nationalists granted
clemency by Clinton were released from prison yesterday. All 11 renounced
terrorism, as part of the clemency agreement. Inside, the WP reports
that the controversy triggered by President Clinton's decision continues to
haunt candidate Clinton, who admittedly botched her reaction to the issue last
week.

            In a WP front story, former Oklahoma congressman Mickey Edwards, now
a professor at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government, claims that Hillary
Clinton is suffering from a typical first-candidate's problem: She feels
compelled to talk. "This is what happens when you can't keep your mouth shut.
... I call it bubble-gum mouth: You put in a nickel, and something comes
out."

            Inside, the WP reports that Al Gore paid a visit to children at a
school in Rhode Island who had expected to meet George W. Bush the day before.
Bush failed to show up, because of bad weather, and Gore took the opportunity
to show him up: "The Gore campaign, better known for playing defense most of
the year, quickly seized the offensive. Moving with uncharacteristic swiftness,
the vice president's campaign wangled an invitation to meet with the students
and hastily rearranged [Gore's] schedule." The WP says that Gore left
Washington at 6:20 a.m. to make it to school on time.

            What's the connection between computer hacking and Chinese food? The
NYT reports that Louis Kao, owner of the Palo Alto Chinese restaurant
that in the 1970s played host to a number of men who pioneered the Internet and
the personal computer industry, yesterday cooked his last meal. Reasons given
by Kao's devotees/guests for the connection between hackers and Chinese food
included: convenience (Chinese restaurants are open late, and hackers eat late
at night); intrigue (Chinese-restaurant menus are mysterious and complex, and
hackers are driven to figure them out); and plain old good taste.

         
      
   
