
   
   
      
         
            Garry Trudeau on George W. as College Boy

            In Shadow , Bob Woodward describes George Bush, at the
height of his popularity immediately following the Gulf War, whining to his
diary about a cartoonist who wrote jokes about his manhood. Garry Trudeau, Bush
wrote, was "a little elitist who is spoiled, derisive, ugly and nasty." I'm
rubber, you're glue, bounce off me and stick to you!
            

            George W. Bush doesn't seem to like the creator of "Doonesbury" much, either. (To
remind yourself why, click on "Flashbacks," and when the little box with the
search engine appears, enter "Bush." Chatterbox is especially fond of the
second installment of "President and First Lady Deal With a Rat," dated Sept.
5, 1989.) In George W.'s case, however, there's a little history to the
relationship. Here is what W. told the Dallas Morning News in 1994:

            

               
                  When Garry Trudeau questioned [the elder Bush's] manhood, I didn't like
it. I didn't like it at all. And I made it absolutely clear to Mr. Trudeau, who
was two years behind me at Yale University. And if he didn't like me telling
him that, I didn't care.
               

            

            Curious about the old-school tie between the likely Republican presidential
nominee and America's preeminent comic-strip artist, Chatterbox asked Trudeau
for his recollections of George W. Bush at Yale. Specifically, Chatterbox
wanted to check out a rumor that, while at Yale, W. told Trudeau to quit
fiddling with that infernal liberal comic strip. Apparently, the rumor is not
true. In an e-mail, Trudeau explained that he didn't start writing "Bulltales"
(as "Doonesbury" was called before Trudeau syndicated it) until the fall of
1968. W. had graduated the previous spring. Trudeau also pointed out that not
many people were calling his comic strip "liberal" during its early years:
"Indeed, when I first started syndication, Time called "Doonesbury"
reactionary. Time !"

            "The only story I can think of that comes close," Trudeau wrote,

            

               
                  is one my roommate tells: Bush approached him and warned him that the
crowd he was running with was trouble--the drugs, the hair, the dress, the
antiwar agitation, etc. There was no question that we in the Class of '70
regarded most of the people in the Class of '68 as the last of old Yale--they
belonged more to our parents' world than to ours. The Class of '69 was caught
in the generational riptide--torn in two directions--but the Class of '70
(which had a radically different demographic--far fewer preppies) thought of
itself as being in the vanguard of the counterculture.
               

               To be fair (not usually my strong suit), a different roommate says he
remembers Bush being open-minded and curious as to what this new freshmen class
was about. My own impression of him was formed almost entirely from our joint
service on the Davenport College (a residential college) Armour Council, to
which I was elected my freshman year under the mistaken impression it had
something to do with student government. In fact, it was the social committee,
and our chief responsibilities were to arrange for bands and kegs of beer. All
I can tell you about Bush was that he showed a lot of command presence during
our deliberations. Indeed, he famously went on to become president of Deke,
where his talents blossomed.

            

            Fast forward to the 1980s:

            

               
                  In more recent times, the various Bushies have repeatedly snarled at me
from afar for all my digs at Geo the Elder. I have always suspected that their
antipathy for me was heightened by a certain "traitor-to-his-class"
incomprehension. On paper, I'm one of them, so what's up with the
manhood-in-a-blind-trust stuff? Jeb Bush once drew me aside at the Republican
Convention, stuck his finger in my face and told me he had only two words for
me--"Walk softly." A particularly productive suggestion. That's about it. Sorry
I can't give you anything more substantial--I just didn't know Dubya all that
well.
               

            

            But wait a minute, Chatterbox thought. What about W.'s telling
Trudeau--making it, in fact, "absolutely clear"-that he "didn't like it …
didn't like it at all"? A possible future president roughs you up and you don't
remember it? Chatterbox queried Trudeau about the Dallas Morning
News quote. "OK, we're getting into a shaky territory here," Trudeau
answered, "because I have a notoriously bad memory."

            

               
                  I have only seen Dubya once since graduation-I think it was at some
command NBC event my wife [Jane Pauley] dragged me to. We did talk
briefly, but I remember it as being completely non-confrontational, that if
anything I was subjected to a charm offensive. That was back when the Bushes
were still trying to woo me over from the Dark Side. Early on, Bar even
purchased an original, making a nice contribution to the Coalition for the
Homeless. She hung it on the wall at the Maine compound, but things got ugly
shortly thereafter …
               

            

         
      
   
