
   
   
      
         
            Slander Patrol: Did Bradley Flip Over Vouchers?

            Both the Republicans and Democratic supporters of Al Gore have been laying
into Bill Bradley for reversing his position on school choice. New Hampshire
State Senator Lou Allesandro, a Gore backer, was quoted yesterday in the
Manchester Union-Leader saying that Bradley recently changed his
position from pro-voucher to anti-voucher "for political expediency." The
current issue of Newsweek makes the same claim, charging Bradley with a
flip-flop on the issue.

            The critics note that Bradley voted for experimental voucher programs in the
Senate as recently as 1992 but now says he doesn't think vouchers are the
answer to problems of education. In an appearance last week in Cleveland--where
a voucher program has been the subject of a heated court battle--Bradley also
raised an objection to vouchers based on the separation of church and
state.

            Sounds like an open-and-shut case. But Bradley's position isn't really
contradictory. It's perfectly consistent--and reasonable--to support
small-scale experiments with vouchers while expressing skepticism about their
potential efficacy and about whether they can pass constitutional muster. The
argument is that since no one knows for certain what kind of education reform
will ultimately be most effective, we should try a lot of different ideas on a
relatively small scale. This was, in fact, Bradley's stated position when he
was in the Senate. Here's what he said about vouchers at a National Press Club
lunch in 1991:

            

               I think the jury is out as to whether it actually would lead to
an improvement of education. I think that choice should be considered. I have
some reservations about it, but in the course of an education bill that moves
through the Congress I think we can look at it thoroughly, and it is a
possibility. As I say, I have some reservations about it, and I think that you
have to confront some of the basic questions about who will receive the
vouchers. And if you receive a voucher, are you allowed to go to any school in
the state? Are you allowed to go to only certain schools? Are you allowed to go
to public or private schools? Are you allowed--there are 15 or 20 different
questions that are raised by the issue of choice and education vouchers.

            

            In 1992, Bradley was one of three Democrats to vote for Bush-supported
legislation that included funding for voucher experiments. In endorsing that
bill (which never passed) Bradley made the same point again: When it comes to
education reform, even imperfect notions are worth trying. "Choice may not be
the panacea for all our nation's education ills," he said in a speech on the
Senate floor, "but we cannot afford not to take an honest look at whether more
options would help kids who today are trapped in the worst schools in our
poorest areas."

            The only thing that would represent a reversal of Bradley's view would be a
categorical statement that he no longer supports any experiments with vouchers.
This is Gore's position, and the one demanded by the teachers' unions. Bradley,
who is interested in vying for their endorsements, may cave and contradict his
earlier statements on the subject. But he hasn't done so yet.

         
      
   
