
   
   
      
         
            Just Say No Comment

            Everybody leads with the decision by Indonesia to allow an armed external
peacekeeping force into East Timor. Both the New York Times
and Los
Angeles Times headlines say that it's a U.N. force that's coming. The
Washington Post headline calls it "Australian-led."
USA
Today's headline notes U.S. support for the development but also the
absence of American ground troops. The NYT front gives plenty of space
to a large picture of Andre Agassi exulting over his win of the U.S. Open and
to a story-with-picture about the New York Jets. The LAT gives a big
chunk of its front to its hometown professional sport: show business awards.
This time it's the Emmys.

            The LAT calls Indonesia's acceptance of foreign troops a "stunning
reversal of policy." The WP adds that it is "in some ways humiliating"
for Indonesia's president and top general. Although the majority of the
peacekeepers figure to be Australian--4,500 out of 7,000, the papers say--the
coverage mentions that the Indonesians would prefer a predominantly Asian
force. (The Wall Street Journal mentions that perhaps the force will
even include Indonesians.) The Post quotes one Indonesian military analyst saying that indeed, there is
anti-white sentiment in East Timor which could make things dangerous for
Australian troops. And, wonders the LAT , what will happen to the
militias?

            A WP front-pager reports that an examination of records reveals that
in 1997 eight federal appeals court judges took part in at least 18 cases
in which they, or their spouses or trusts they managed held stock in one of the
parties involved. (The story is a follow-up to one done last year in the Kansas
City Star , by the same reporter, now with the Post .) The judges,
says the paper, attributed their participation to innocent mistakes or memory
lapses about their finances. One case cited gives a feel for the amount of
lapse required: The husband of a judge who participated in a ruling favorable
to Wal-Mart held up to $50,000 worth of stock in the retailer. Some of the
offending judges are quoted saying that they are "chagrined" and promise "to
try to be more careful." The story doesn't call the practice "illegal" (a
related editorial does, though) and doesn't explain to the reader why the
judges aren't looking at criminal charges, civil suits, or at least discipline
from within their profession.

            The WP runs an AP dispatch of a Fox News interview with former
President George Bush, in which he supports his presidential candidate son's
decision not to answer questions about alleged youthful drug use. A suggestion:
If the press is looking for embarrassing questions to ask presidential
candidates about their long-ago past, how about this one, arguably much more
relevant to presidential performance than ancient drug use: What were your SAT
scores? The real issue isn't who used dope; it's who is a dope.

            The NYT runs a piece about the 87-year-old great-grandmother revealed by a forthcoming book to
have been an undetected KGB operative, active from the early '40s until the
early '70s. The little old lady fessed up this past Saturday, saying that she
had been trying to help Russia keep abreast of Britain, America and Germany.
But she added, "In general, I do not agree with spying against one's country."
The Times says the British press is saying that soon up to a dozen more
Britons who spied for Soviet intelligence will be unmasked, including a
now-dead prominent public figure.

            The WP legal columnist, David Segal, makes a sharp observation upon a
visit to the new Web site of Washington D.C.'s premier lobbying outfit, Patton
Boggs. The hype text says at one point, "Patton Boggs was the first national
law firm to recognize that all three branches of government could serve as
forums to achieve client goals." How, wonders Segal, does the firm lobby the
judiciary?

            The NYT's William Safire has a wicked version of President Clinton's
account of Hillary's recusal from his FALN clemency offer: "I want you to
listen to me. I never discussed clemency for terrorists with that woman, Ms.
Clinton. Not a single time; never." Safire also asks a properly pointed
question: If federal employees can't even accept a lunch from an outsider, what
of President Clinton's acceptance of a house loan guarantee worth about a grand
a month?

            Last Thursday's USAT ran an op-ed piece worth looking up. It
recounted a wacky trend in shady political campaign contributions: maximum
donations "by" children and even infants. George W. Bush recently received
separate $1K donations from twin three-year-olds, the grand children of a Utah
multimillionaire. Lest you think that Dubya has cornered the market on this
form of cribbing, the piece reports that in 1996, the ranks of Clinton-Gore
donors included an 11-year-old.

            Today's NYT runs a correction saying that an August 24 story about
money added by Congress to appropriations bills favoring specific universities
"referred incompletely to the source of the $797 million figure" which is this
year's total for such funds. Now reading that, wouldn't you think the original
story said something about that source? Well, it didn't. That figure was
calculated by The Chronicle of Higher Education in its own story on the
topic, but in the August 24 Times story, the $797 million appears
unattributed in the second paragraph, and the Chronicle shows up in the
fourteenth, and without being connected to the figure. Hence today's newspaper
deconstruction: "referred incompletely to the source" means "referred to the
source, without mentioning that it was the source." These baroque newspaper
corrections are to a mistake what a comb-over is to baldness.

         
      
   
