
   
   
      
         
            What Is Money Laundering?
            

            Federal investigators suspect that Russian mobsters may have
used the Bank of New York to launder as much as $10 billion over the last two
years. What exactly is money laundering and how does it work?

            In short, money laundering is the conversion of illegally obtained profits
into funds that appear legitimate--that is, making "dirty" money "clean." It is
used by drugs traffickers, arms smugglers, and anyone else who needs to spend
ill-gotten gains without arousing suspicion. White collar criminals and corrupt
political leaders also frequently launder funds to avoid taxes or conceal
embezzlement.

            The simplest form of money laundering is combining criminal profits with
earnings from a legitimate, cash-intensive business. For example, say a drug
dealer wants to disguise $10,000 in monthly profits from cocaine sales. So, he
buys a bar that takes in $50,000 a month--mostly in cash. At the end of each
month, he slips an extra $10,000 into his till and reports $60,000 in bar
revenue. Although his drug income is now taxable, it is worth that price to
make the profits appear legal.

            Larger amounts, like $10 billion, can't just be slipped into the till.
Laundering big sums generally involves three steps:

            
               Placement : The cash proceeds (often thousands of small-denomination
bills) enter the legitimate banking system. Many countries require that large
cash transactions (in the United States, anything above $10,000) be reported to
authorities. So, launderers often deposit proceeds piece by piece or export the
money to countries with relaxed banking regulations.

            
               Layering : The money is separated from its criminal origins through
complex financial transactions. Often, funds will be transferred dozens of
times through multiple accounts, companies, and countries, making the paper
trail virtually impossible to follow.

            
               Integration : The money returns to its original source, apparently as
legitimate income.

            There are countless variations on this pattern. One of the most common is
the "loan-back" scheme, in which the launderer essentially borrows money from
himself. First, he sets up a lending company in a country with few financial
regulations. Then he fills its coffers with illegal profits, layered through
multiple accounts. When the launderer wants to make a purchase in his home
country, he simply "borrows" the money from the overseas lender. This money,
once illegal, now appears to be a legitimate loan.

            Next question?

         
      
   
